# Applying Unary Operators

By definition, a _unary_ operator is one that requires exactly one operand, or variable, to
function. As shown in Table 2.2, they often perform simple tasks, such as increasing a
numeric variable by one or negating a boolean value.

> #### Table 2.2 Unary operators
|Operator|Examples|Description|
|:---|:---|:---|
|Logical complement| !a |Inverts a boolean’s logical value|
|Bitwise complement| ~b |Inverts all 0s and 1s in a number|
|Plus| +c |Indicates a number is positive, although numbers are assumed to be positive in Java unless accompanied by a negative unary operator|
|Negation or minus| -d |Indicates a literal number is negative or negates an expression|
|Increment| ++e <br /> f++ |Increments a value by 1|
|Decrement| --f <br /> h-- |Decrements a value by 1|
|Cas|t (String)i |Casts a value to a specific type|

&emsp;&emsp;
Even though Table 2.2 includes the casting operator, we postpone discussing casting until
the “Assigning Values” section later in this chapter, since that is where it is commonly used.

## I. Complement and Negation Operators
Since we’re going to be working with a lot of numeric operators in this chapter, let’s get the
**boolean** one out of the way first. The _logical complement operator_ (!) flips the value of a
**boolean** expression. For example, if the value is `true`, it will be converted to `false`, and
vice versa. To illustrate this, compare the outputs of the following statements: <br />

```java
boolean isAnimalAsleep = false;
System.out.print(isAnimalAsleep); // false
isAnimalAsleep = !isAnimalAsleep;
System.out.print(isAnimalAsleep); // true
```

&emsp;&emsp;
For the exam, you also need to know about the _bitwise complement operator_ (~), which
flips all of the 0s and 1s in a number. It can only be applied to integer numeric types such as
**byte**, **short**, **char**, **int**, and **long**. Let’s try an example. For simplicity, we only show the
last four bits (instead of all 32 bits).

```java
int value = 3;                  // Stored as 0011
int complement = ~value;        // Stored as 1100
System.out.println(value);      // 3
System.out.println(complement); // -4
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Relax! You don’t need to know how to do complicated bit arithmetic on the exam, as
long as you remember this rule: to find the bitwise complement of a number, multiply it by
negative one and then subtract one.

```java
System.out.println(-1 * value - 1);         // -4
System.out.println(-1 * complement - 1);    // 3
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Moving on to more common operators, the negation operator (-) reverses the sign of a
numeric expression, as shown in these statements:

```java
double zooTemperature = 1.21;
System.out.println(zooTemperature); // 1.21
zooTemperature = -zooTemperature;
System.out.println(zooTemperature); // -1.21
zooTemperature = -(-zooTemperature);
System.out.println(zooTemperature); // -1.21
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Notice that in the last example we used parentheses, `()`, for the negation operator, `-`, to
apply the negation twice. If we had instead written `--`, then it would have been interpreted
as the decrement operator and printed `-2.21`. You will see more of that decrement operator shortly. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Based on the description, it might be obvious that some operators require the variable
or expression they’re acting on to be of a specific type. For example, you cannot apply a
negation operator `-` to a **boolean** expression, nor can you apply a logical complement
operator `!` to a `numeric` expression. Be wary of questions on the exam that try to do this,
as they cause the code to fail to compile. For example, none of the following lines of code
will compile:

```java
int pelican = !5;           // DOES NOT COMPILE
boolean penguin = -true;    // DOES NOT COMPILE
boolean peacock = !0;       // DOES NOT COMPILE
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The first statement will not compile because in Java you cannot perform a logical
inversion of a numeric value. The second statement does not compile because you cannot
numerically negate a boolean value; you need to use the logical inverse operator. Finally,
the last statement does not compile because you cannot take the logical complement of a
numeric value, nor can you assign an integer to a boolean variable.

> ### Tip:
> Keep an eye out for questions on the exam that use numeric values (such
as `0` or `1`) with **boolean** expressions. Unlike in some other programming
languages, in Java, `1` and `true` are not related in any way, just as `0` and
`false` are not related.

## II. Increment and Decrement Operators
Increment and decrement operators, `++` and `--`, respectively, can be applied to numeric 
variables and have a high order of precedence compared to binary operators. In other words,
they are often applied first in an expression. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Increment and decrement operators require special care because the order in which they
are attached to their associated variable can make a difference in how an expression is 
processed. Table 2.3 lists each of these operators.

> #### Table 2.3 Increment and decrement operators
|Operator| Example |Description|
|:---|:---|:---|
|Pre-increment| ++w |Increases the value by 1 and returns the _new_ value|
|Pre-decrement| --x |Decreases the value by 1 and returns the _new_ value|
|Post-increment| y++ |Increases the value by 1 and returns the _original_ value|
|Post-decrement| z-- |Decreases the value by 1 and returns the _original_ value|

&emsp;&emsp;
The following code snippet illustrates this distinction:

```java
int parkAttendance = 0;
System.out.println(parkAttendance);     // 0
System.out.println(++parkAttendance);   // 1
System.out.println(parkAttendance);     // 1
System.out.println(parkAttendance--);   // 1
System.out.println(parkAttendance);     // 0
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The first pre-increment operator updates the value for parkAttendance and outputs
the new value of 1. The next post-decrement operator also updates the value of
parkAttendance but outputs the value before the decrement occurs.

> ### Note:
> For the exam, it is critical that you know the difference between 
expressions like `parkAttendance++` and `++parkAttendance`. The increment
and decrement operators will be in multiple questions, and confusion
about which value is returned could cause you to lose a lot of points on
the exam.