# Working with Built-in Functional Interfaces

It would be inconvenient to write your own functional interface any time you want to write
a lambda. Luckily, a large number of general-purpose functional interfaces are provided for
you. We cover them in this section. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The core functional interfaces in Table 8.4 are provided in the java.util.function
package. We cover generics in the next chapter, but for now, you just need to know that
<T> allows the interface to take an object of a specified type. If a second type parameter is
needed, we use the next letter, U. If a distinct return type is needed, we choose R for return as
the generic type.

> **Table 8.4**: Core Functional Interfaces

|Functional interface|Return type| Method name  |# of parameters|
|--------------------|-----------|--------------|---------------|
|Supplier<T> |T | get()        |0|
|Consumer<T> |void | accept(T)    |1 (T)|
|BiConsumer<T, U> |void | accept(T, U) |2 (T, U)|
|Predicate<T> |boolean | test(T)      |1 (T)|
|BiPredicate<T, U> |boolean | test(T, U)   |2 (T, U)|
|Function<T, R> |R | apply(T)     |1 (T)|
|BiFunction<T, U, R> |R | apply(T, U)  |2 (T, U)|
|UnaryOperator<T> |T | apply(T)     |1 (T)|
|BinaryOperator<T> |T | apply(T, T)  |2 (T, T)|

&emsp;&emsp;
For the exam, you need to memorize Table 8.4. We will give you lots of practice in this
section to help make it memorable. Before you ask, most of the time we don’t assign the
implementation of the interface to a variable. The interface name is implied, and it is passed
directly to the method that needs it. We are introducing the names so that you can better
understand and remember what is going on. By the next chapter, we will assume that you
have this down and stop creating the intermediate variable.

> **Note**: <br />
> You learn about a few more functional interfaces later in the book. In the
next chapter, we cover Comparator. In Chapter 13, “Concurrency,” we
discuss Runnable and Callable. These may show up on the exam when
you are asked to recognize functional interfaces.

&emsp;&emsp;
Let’s look at how to implement each of these interfaces. Since both lambdas and method
references appear all over the exam, we show an implementation using both where possible.
After introducing the interfaces, we also cover some convenience methods available on these
interfaces.

## I. Implementing Supplier
A Supplier is used when you want to generate or supply values without taking any input. The
Supplier interface is defined as follows:

```java
@FunctionalInterface
public interface Supplier<T> {
    T get();
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
You can create a LocalDate object using the factory method now(). This example shows
how to use a Supplier to call this factory:

```java
Supplier<LocalDate> s1 = LocalDate::now;
Supplier<LocalDate> s2 = () -> LocalDate.now();

LocalDate d1 = s1.get();
LocalDate d2 = s2.get();

System.out.println(d1); // 2022-02-20
System.out.println(d2); // 2022-02-20
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This example prints a date twice. It’s also a good opportunity to review static method
references. The LocalDate::now method reference is used to create a Supplier to assign
to an intermediate variable s1. A Supplier is often used when constructing new objects.
For example, we can print two empty StringBuilder objects:

```java
Supplier<StringBuilder> s1 = StringBuilder::new;
Supplier<StringBuilder> s2 = () -> new StringBuilder();

System.out.println(s1.get()); // Empty string
System.out.println(s2.get()); // Empty string
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This time, we used a constructor reference to create the object. We’ve been using generics
to declare what type of Supplier we are using. This can be a little long to read. Can you
figure out what the following does? Just take it one step at a time:

```java
Supplier<ArrayList<String>> s3 = ArrayList::new;
ArrayList<String> a1 = s3.get();
System.out.println(a1); // []
```

&emsp;&emsp;
We have a Supplier of a certain type. That type happens to be ArrayList<String>.
Then calling get() creates a new instance of ArrayList<String>, which is the generic
type of the Supplier—in other words, a generic that contains another generic. Be sure to
look at the code carefully when this type of thing comes up. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Notice how we called get() on the functional interface. What would happen if we tried to
print out s3 itself?

```java
System.out.println(s3);
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The code prints something like this:

```java
functionalinterface.BuiltIns$$Lambda$1/0x0000000800066840@4909b8da
```

&emsp;&emsp;
That’s the result of calling toString() on a lambda. Yuck. This actually does mean
something. Our test class is named BuiltIns, and it is in a package that we created named
functionalinterface. Then comes $$, which means that the class doesn’t exist in a class
file on the file system. It exists only in memory. You don’t need to worry about the rest.

## II. Implementing Consumer an BiConsumer

You use a Consumer when you want to do something with a parameter but not return
anything. BiConsumer does the same thing, except that it takes two parameters. The interfaces
are defined as follows:

```java
@FunctionalInterface
public interface Consumer<T> {
    void accept(T t);
    // omitted default method
}

@FunctionalInterface
public interface BiConsumer<T, U> {
    void accept(T t, U u);
    // omitted default method
}
```

> **Tip**: <br />
> You’ll notice this pattern. Bi means two. It comes from Latin, but you
can remember it from English words like binary (0 or 1) or bicycle (two
wheels). Always add another parameter when you see Bi.

&emsp;&emsp;
Pringint is a common use of the Consumer interface:

```java
Consumer<String> c1 = System.out::println;
Consumer<String> c2 = x -> System.out.println(x);

c1.accept("Annie"); // Annie
c2.accept("Annie"); // Annie
```

&emsp;&emsp;
BiConsumer is called with two parameters. They don’t have to be the same type. For
example, we can put a key and a value in a map using this interface:

```java
var map = new HashMap<String, Integer>();
BiConsumer<String, Integer> b1 = map::put;
BiConsumer<String, Integer> b2 = (k, v) -> map.put(k, v);

b1.accept("chicken", 7);
b2.accept("chick", 1);

System.out.println(map); // {chicken=7, chick=1}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The output is {chicken=7, chick=1}, which shows that both BiConsumer implementations 
were called. When declaring b1, we used an instance method reference on an object
since we want to call a method on the local variable map. The code to instantiate b1 is a
good bit shorter than the code for b2. This is probably why the exam is so fond of method
references. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
As another example, we use the same type for both generic parameters:

```java
var map = new HashMap<String, String>();
BiConsumer<String, String> b1 = map::put;
BiConsumer<String, String> b2 = (k, v) -> map.put(k, v);

b1.accept("chicken", "Cluck");
b2.accept("chick", "Tweep");

System.out.println(map); // {chicken=Cluck, chick=Tweep}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This shows that a BiConsumer can use the same type for both the T and U generic parameters.

## III. Implementing Predicate and BiPredicate
Predicate is often used when filtering or matching. Both are common operations. A BiPredicate
is just like a Predicate, except that it takes two parameters instead of one. The interfaces are
defined as follows:

```java
@FunctionalInterface
public interface Predicate<T> {
    boolean test(T t);
    // omitted default and static methods
}

@FunctionalInterface
public interface BiPredicate<T, U> {
    boolean test(T t, U u);
    // omitted default methods
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
You can use a Predicate to test a condition.

```java
Predicate<String> p1 = String::isEmpty;
Predicate<String> p2 = x -> x.isEmpty();

System.out.println(p1.test("")); // true
System.out.println(p2.test("")); // true
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Ths prints true twice. More interesting is a BiPredicate. This example also prints
true twice:

```java
BiPredicate<String, String> b1 = String::startsWith;
BiPredicate<String, String> b2 =
    (string, prefix) -> string.startsWith(prefix);

System.out.println(b1.test("chicken", "chick")); // true
System.out.println(b2.test("chicken", "chick")); // true
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The method reference includes both the instance variable and parameter for
startsWith(). This is a good example of how method references save quite a lot of 
typing. The downside is that they are less explicit, and you really have to understand what
is going on!

## IV. Implementing Function and BiFunction
A Function is responsible for turning one parameter into a value of a potentially different
type and returning it. Similarly, a BiFunction is responsible for turning two parameters into a
value and returning it. The interfaces are defined as follows:

```java
@FunctionalInterface
public interface Function<T, R> {
    R apply(T t);
    // omitted default and static methods
}

@FunctionalInterface
public interface BiFunction<T, U, R> {
    R apply(T t, U u);
    // omitted default method
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
For example, this function converts a String to the length of the String:

```java
Function<String, Integer> f1 = String::length;
Function<String, Integer> f2 = x -> x.length();

System.out.println(f1.apply("cluck")); // 5
System.out.println(f2.apply("cluck")); // 5
```

This function turns a String into an Integer. Well, technically, it turns the String into
an int, which is autoboxed into an Integer. The types don’t have to be different. The 
following combines two String objects and produces another String:

```java
BiFunction<String, String, String> b1 = String::concat;
BiFunction<String, String, String> b2 =
    (string, toAdd) -> string.concat(toAdd);

System.out.println(b1.apply("baby ", "chick")); // baby chick
System.out.println(b2.apply("baby ", "chick")); // baby chick
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The first two types in the BiFunction are the input types. The third is the result type.
For the method reference, the first parameter is the instance that concat() is called on, and
the second is passed to concat().

## V. Implementing UnaryOperator and BinaryOperator
UnaryOperator and BinaryOperator are special cases of a Function. They require all
type parameters to be the same type. A UnaryOperator transforms its value into one of the
same type. For example, incrementing by one is a unary operation. In fact, UnaryOperator
extends Function. A BinaryOperator merges two values into one of the same type. 
Adding two numbers is a binary operation. Similarly, BinaryOperator extends BiFunction.
The interfaces are defined as follows:

```java
@FunctionalInterface
public interface UnaryOperator<T> extends Function<T, T> { 
    // omitted static method
}

@FunctionalInterface
public interface BinaryOperator<T> extends BiFunction<T, T, T> {
    // omitted static methods 
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This means the method signatures look like this:

```java
T apply(T t);        // UnaryOperator
        
T apply(T t1, T t2); // BinaryOperator
```

&emsp;&emsp;
In the Javadoc, you’ll notice that these methods are inherited from the
Function/BiFunction superclass. The generic declarations on the subclass are what force
the type to be the same. For the unary example, notice how the return type is the same type
as the parameter.

```java
UnaryOperator<String> u1 = String::toUpperCase;
UnaryOperator<String> u2 = x -> x.toUpperCase();

System.out.println(u1.apply("chirp")); // CHIRP
System.out.println(u2.apply("chirp")); // CHIRP
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This prints CHIRP twice. We don’t need to specify the return type in the generics
because UnaryOperator requires it to be the same as the parameter. And now here’s the
binary example:

```java
BinaryOperator<String> b1 = String::concat;
BinaryOperator<String> b2 = (string, toAdd) -> string.concat(toAdd);

System.out.println(b1.apply("baby ", "chick")); // baby chick
System.out.println(b2.apply("baby ", "chick")); // baby chick
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Notice that this does the same thing as the BiFunction example. The code is more 
succinct, which shows the importance of using the best functional interface. It’s nice to have one
generic type specified instead of three.

## VI. Checking Functional Interfaces

It’s really important to know the number of parameters, types, return value, and method
name for each of the functional interfaces. Now would be a good time to memorize
Table 8.4 if you haven’t done so already. Let’s do some examples to practice. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
What functional interface would you use in these three situations?

- Returns a String without taking any parameters
- Returns a Boolean and takes a String
- Returns an Integer and takes two Integer

&emsp;&emsp;
Ready? Think about what your answers are before continuing. Really. You have to
know this cold. Okay. The first one is a Supplier<String> because it generates an object
and takes zero parameters. The second one is a Function<String,Boolean> because
it takes one parameter and returns another type. It’s a little tricky. You might think it is a
Predicate<String>. Note that a Predicate returns a boolean primitive and not a
Boolean object. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Finally, the third one is either a BinaryOperator<Integer> or a
BiFunction<Integer,Integer,Integer>. Since BinaryOperator is a special case of
BiFunction, either is a correct answer. BinaryOperator<Integer> is the better answer
of the two since it is more specific. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Let’s try this exercise again but with code. It’s harder with code. The first thing you do is
look at how many parameters the lambda takes and whether there is a return value. What
functional interface would you use to fill in the blanks for these?

```java
6: ______ <List> ex1 = x -> "".equals(x.get(0));
7: ______ <Long> ex2 = (Long l) -> System.out.println(l);
8: ______ <String, String> ex3 = (s1, s2) -> false;
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Again, think about the answers before continuing. Ready? Line 6 passes one List 
parameter to the lambda and returns a boolean. This tells us that it is a Predicate or Function.
Since the generic declaration has only one parameter, it is a Predicate. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Line 7 passes one Long parameter to the lambda and doesn’t return anything. This tells
us that it is a Consumer. Line 8 takes two parameters and returns a boolean. When you see
a boolean returned, think Predicate unless the generics specify a Boolean return type. In this
case, there are two parameters, so it is a BiPredicate. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Are you finding these easy? If not, review Table 8.4 again. We aren’t kidding. You need to
know the table really well. Now that you are fresh from studying the table, we are going to
play “identify the error.” These are meant to be tricky

```java
6: Function<List<String>> ex1 = x -> x.get(0); // DOES NOT COMPILE
7: UnaryOperator<Long> ex2 = (Long l) -> 3.14; // DOES NOT COMPILE
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Line 6 claims to be a Function. A Function needs to specify two generic types: the
input parameter type and the return value type. The return value type is missing from line 6,
causing the code not to compile. Line 7 is a UnaryOperator, which returns the same type
as it is passed in. The example returns a double rather than a Long, causing the code not
to compile.

## VII. Using Convenience Methods on Functional Interfaces

By definition, all functional interfaces have a single abstract method. This doesn’t mean they
can have only one method, though. Several of the common functional interfaces provide a
number of helpful default interface methods. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Table 8.5 shows the convenience methods on the built-in functional interfaces that you
need to know for the exam. All of these facilitate modifying or combining functional 
interfaces of the same type. Note that Table 8.5 shows only the main interfaces. The BiConsumer,
BiFunction, and BiPredicate interfaces have similar methods available.

> **Table 8.5**: Convenience methods

|Interface instance|Method return type|Method name|Method parameters|
|------------------|------------------|------------|----------------|
|Consumer |Consumer |andThen() |Consumer|
|Function |Function |andThen() |Function|
|Function |Function |compose() |Function|
|Predicate |Predicate |and() |Predicate|
|Predicate |Predicate |negate() |—|
|Predicate |Predicate |or() |Predicate|

&emsp;&emsp;
Let’s start with these two Predicate variables:

```java
Predicate<String> egg = s -> s.contains("egg");
Predicate<String> brown = s -> s.contains("brown");
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Now we want a Predicate for brown eggs and another for all other colors of eggs. We
could write this by hand, as shown here:

```java
Predicate<String> brownEggs = s -> s.contains("egg") && s.contains("brown");
Predicate<String> otherEggs = s -> s.contains("egg") && !s.contains("brown");
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This works, but it’s not great. It’s a bit long to read, and it contains duplication. What if
we decide the letter e should be capitalized in egg? We’d have to change it in three variables:
egg, brownEggs, and otherEggs. A better way to deal with this situation is to use two of
the default methods on Predicate.

```java
Predicate<String> brownEggs = egg.and(brown);
Predicate<String> otherEggs = egg.and(brown.negate());
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Neat! Now we are reusing the logic in the original Predicate variables to build two new
ones. It’s shorter and clearer what the relationship is between variables. We can also change
the spelling of egg in one place, and the other two objects will have new logic because they
reference it. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Moving on to Consumer, let’s take a look at the andThen() method, which runs two
functional interfaces in sequence:

```java
Consumer<String> c1 = x -> System.out.print("1: " + x);
Consumer<String> c2 = x -> System.out.print(",2: " + x);

Consumer<String> combined = c1.andThen(c2);
combined.accept("Annie"); // 1: Annie,2: Annie
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Notice how the same parameter is passed to both c1 and c2. This shows that the
Consumer instances are run in sequence and are independent of each other. By contrast, the
compose() method on Function chains functional interfaces. However, it passes along the
output of one to the input of another.

```java
Function<Integer, Integer> before = x -> x + 1;
Function<Integer, Integer> after = x -> x * 2;

Function<Integer, Integer> combined = after.compose(before);
System.out.println(combined.apply(3)); // 8
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This time, the before runs first, turning the 3 into 4. Then the after runs, doubling the
4 to 8. All of the methods in this section are helpful for simplifying your code as you work
with functional interfaces.

## VIII. Learning the Functional Interfaces for Primitives
Remember when we told you to memorize Table 8.4 with the common functional interfaces?
Did you? If you didn’t, go do it now. We’ll wait. We are about to make it more involved.
There are also a large number of special functional interfaces for primitives. These are useful
in Chapter 10 when we cover streams and optionals. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Most of them are for the double, int, and long types. There is one exception, which is
BooleanSupplier. We cover that before introducing the functional interfaces for double,
int, and long.

### &emsp;&emsp; 1. Functional Interfaces for boolean
BooleanSupplier is a separate type. It has one method to implement:

```java
@FunctionalInterface
public interface BooleanSupplier {
    boolean getAsBoolean();
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
It works just as you’ve come to expect from functional interfaces. Here’s an example:

```java
12: BooleanSupplier b1 = () -> true;
13: BooleanSupplier b2 = () -> Math.random() > .5;
14: System.out.println(b1.getAsBoolean()); // true
15: System.out.println(b2.getAsBoolean()); // false
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Lines 12 and 13 each create a BooleanSupplier, which is the only functional interface
for boolean. Line 14 prints true, since it is the result of b1. Line 15 prints true or false,
depending on the random value generated.

### &emsp;&emsp; 2. Functional Interfaces for double, int, and long
Most of the functional interfaces are for double, int, and long. Table 8.6 shows the
equivalent of Table 8.4 for these primitives. You probably won’t be surprised that you have
to memorize it. Luckily, you’ve memorized Table 8.4 by now and can apply what you’ve
learned to Table 8.6.

> **Table 8.6**: Common functional interfaces for primitives

|Functional interfaces|Return type|Single abstract method| # of parameters |
|---------------------|-----------|-----------------------|-----------------|
|DoubleSupplier |double |getAsDouble() | 0               |
|IntSupplier |int |getAsInt() | 0               |
|LongSupplier |long |getAsLong() | 0               |
|DoubleConsumer |void |accept| 1 (double)      |
|IntConsumer |void |accept| 1 (int)         |
|LongConsumer |void |accept| 1 (long)        |
|DoublePredicate |boolean |test| 1 (double)      |
|IntPredicate |boolean |test| 1 (int)         |
|LongPredicate |boolean |test| 1 (long)        |
|DoubleFunction |R |apply| 1 (double)      |
|IntFunction |R |apply| 1 (int)         |
|LongFunction |R |apply| 1 (long)        |
|DoubleUnaryOperator |double |applyAsDouble| 1 (double)      |
|IntUnaryOperator |int |applyAsInt| 1 (int)         |
|LongUnaryOperator |long |applyAsLong| 1 (long)        |
|DoubleBinaryOperator |double |applyAsDouble| 2 (double, double)|
|IntBinaryOperator |int |applyAsInt| 2 (int, int)    |
|LongBinaryOperator |long |applyAsLong| 2 (long, long)   |

&emsp;&emsp;
There are a few things to notice that are different between Table 8.4 and Table 8.6:

- Generics are gone from some of the interfaces, and instead the type name tells us what
primitive type is involved. In other cases, such as IntFunction, only the return type
generic is needed because we’re converting a primitive int into an object.
- The single abstract method is often renamed when a primitive type is returned.

&emsp;&emsp;
In addition to Table 8.4 equivalents, some interfaces are specific to primitives. Table 8.7
lists these. <br />

> **Table 8.7** Primitive-specific functional interfaces

|Functional interfaces|Return type|Single abstract method| # of parameters |
|---------------------|-----------|-----------------------|-----------------|
|ToDoubleFunction<T>|double|applyAsDouble| 1 (T)           |
|ToIntFunction<T>|int|applyAsInt| 1 (T)|
|ToLongFunction<T>|long|applyAsLong| 1 (T)|
|ToDoubleBiFunction<T,U>|double|applyAsDouble| 2 (T, U)|
|ToIntBiFunction<T,U>|int|applyAsInt| 2 (T, U)|
|ToLongBiFunction<T,U>|long|applyAsLong| 2 (T, U)|
|DoubleToIntFunction|double|applyAsInt| 1 (double)|
|DoubleToLongFunction|double|applyAsLong| 1 (double)|
|IntToDoubleFunction|int|applyAsDouble| 1 (int)|
|IntToLongFunction|int|applyAsLong| 1 (int)|
|LongToDoubleFunction|long|applyAsDouble| 1 (long)|
|LongToIntFunction|long|applyAsInt| 1 (long)|
|ObjDoubleConsumer<T>|void|accept| 2 (T, double)|
|ObjIntConsumer<T>|void|accept| 2 (T, int)|
|ObjLongConsumer<T>|void|accept| 2 (T, long)|

&emsp;&emsp;
We’ve been using functional interfaces for a while now, so you should have a good grasp
of how to read the table. Let’s do one example just to be sure. Which functional interface
would you use to fill in the blank to make the following code compile?

```java
var d = 1.0;
______ f1 = x -> 1;
f1.applyAsInt(d);
```

&emsp;&emsp;
When you see a question like this, look for clues. You can see that the functional interface
in question takes a double parameter and returns an int. You can also see that it has a single
abstract method named applyAsInt. The DoubleToIntFunction and ToIntFunction
functional interfaces meet all three of those criteria.
