# Calling a _CallableStatement_

In some situations, it is useful to store SQL queries in the database instead of packaging
them with the Java code. This is particularly useful when there are many complex queries.
A _stored procedure_ is code that is compiled in advance and stored in the database. Stored
procedures are commonly written in a database-specific variant of SQL, which varies among
database software providers. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Using a stored procedure reduces network round trips. It also allows database experts to
own that part of the code. However, stored procedures are database-specific and introduce
complexity into maintaining your application. On the exam, you need to know how to call a
stored procedure but not decide when to use one. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
You don’t need to know how to read or write a stored procedure for the exam. Therefore,
we have not included any in the book. They are in the code from setting up the sample 
database if you are curious.

> #### Note
> You do not need to learn anything database-specific for the exam. Since
studying stored procedures can be quite complicated, we recommend
limiting your studying on **CallableStatement** to what is in this book.

&emsp;&emsp;
We will be using four stored procedures in this section. Table 15.7 summarizes what you
need to know about them. In the real world, none of these would be good implementations
since they aren’t complex enough to warrant being stored procedures. As you can see in the
table, stored procedures allow parameters to be for input only, output only, or both.

> **Table 15.7** Sample stored procedures
> 
> |Name|Parameter name|Parameter type|Description|
> |---|---|---|---|
> |read_e_names() |n/a |n/a |Returns all rows in names table that have name beginning with e or E
> |read_names_by_letter() |prefix |IN |Returns all rows in names table that have name beginning with specified parameter (case insensitive)
> |magic_number() |num |OUT |Returns number 42
> |double_number() |num |INOUT |Multiplies parameter by two and returns that number

&emsp;&emsp;
In the next four sections, we look at how to call each of these stored procedures.

## I. Calling a Procedure without Parameters
Our `read_e_names()` stored procedure doesn’t take any parameters. It does return a
**ResultSet**. Since we worked with a **ResultSet** in the **PreparedStatement** section, here
we can focus on how the stored procedure is called.

```
12: String sql = "{call read_e_names()}";
13: try (CallableStatement cs = conn.prepareCall(sql);
14:     ResultSet rs = cs.executeQuery()) {
15:
16:     while (rs.next()) {
17:         System.out.println(rs.getString(3));
18:     }
19: }
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Line 12 introduces a new bit of syntax. A stored procedure is called by putting the word
**call** and the procedure name in braces ({}). Line 13 creates a **CallableStatement** object.
When we created a **PreparedStatement**, we used the `prepareStatement()` method.
Here, we use the `prepareCall()` method instead. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Lines 14–18 should look familiar. They are the standard logic we have been using to get a
**ResultSet** and loop through it. This stored procedure returns the underlying table, so the 
columns are the same.

## II. Passing an _IN_ Parameter
A stored procedure that always returns the same thing is only somewhat useful.
We’ve created a new version of that stored procedure that is more generic. The
`read_names_by_letter()` stored procedure takes a parameter for the prefix or first letter
of the stored procedure. An **IN** parameter is used for input. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
There are two differences in calling it compared to our previous stored procedure.

```
25: var sql = "{call read_names_by_letter(?)}";
26: try (var cs = conn.prepareCall(sql)) {
27:     cs.setString("prefix", "Z");
28:
29:     try (var rs = cs.executeQuery()) {
30:         while (rs.next()) {
31:             System.out.println(rs.getString(3));
32:         }
33:     }
34: }
```

&emsp;&emsp;
On line 25, we have to pass a **?** to show we have a parameter. This should be familiar
from bind variables with a **PreparedStatement**. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
On line 27, we set the value of that parameter. Unlike with **PreparedStatement**, we can use
either the parameter number (starting with 1) or the parameter name. That means these two
statements are equivalent:

```
cs.setString(1, "Z");
cs.setString("prefix", "Z");
```

## III. Returning an _OUT_ Parameter
In our previous examples, we returned a **ResultSet**. Some stored procedures return
other information. Luckily, stored procedures can have **OUT** parameters for output. The
`magic_number()` stored procedure sets its **OUT** parameter to 42. There are a few 
differences here:

```
40: var sql = "{?= call magic_number(?) }";
41: try (var cs = conn.prepareCall(sql)) {
42:     cs.registerOutParameter(1, Types.INTEGER);
43:     cs.execute();
44:     System.out.println(cs.getInt("num"));
45: }
```

&emsp;&emsp;
On line 40, we include two special characters (**?=**) to specify that the stored procedure
has an output value. This is optional since we have the **OUT** parameter, but it does aid in
readability. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
On line 42, we register the **OUT** parameter. This is important. It allows JDBC to retrieve
the value on line 44. Remember to always call `registerOutParameter()` for each **OUT** or **INOUT**
parameter (which we cover next). <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
On line 43, we call `execute()` instead of `executeQuery()` since we are not returning a
ResultSet from our stored procedure.

> #### Database-Specific Behavior
> Some databases are lenient about certain things this chapter says are required. For
example, some databases allow you to omit the following:
> - Braces ({})
> - Bind variable (?) if it is an OUT parameter
> - Call to registerOutParameter()
> 
> For the exam, you need to answer according to the full requirements, which are described
in this book. For example, you should answer exam questions as if braces are required.

## IV. Working with an _INOUT_ Parameter
Finally, it is possible to use the same parameter for both input and output. As you read
this code, see whether you can spot which lines are required for the **IN** part and which are
required for the **OUT** part:

```
50: var sql = "{call double_number(?)}";
51: try (var cs = conn.prepareCall(sql)) {
52:     cs.setInt(1, 8);
53:     cs.registerOutParameter(1, Types.INTEGER);
54:     cs.execute();
55:     System.out.println(cs.getInt("num"));
56: }
```

&emsp;&emsp;
For an **IN** parameter, line 52 is required since it sets the value. For an **OUT** parameter, line
53 is required to register it. Line 54 uses `execute()` again because we are not returning a
**ResultSet**. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Remember that an INOUT parameter acts as both an **IN** parameter and an **OUT** parameter,
so it has all the requirements of both.

## V. Comparing Callable Statement Parameters
Table 15.8 reviews the different types of parameters. You need to know this well
for the exam.

> **Table 15.8** Stored procedure parameter types
> 
> |Parameter type|IN|OUT|INOUT|
> |---|---|---|---|
|Used for input |Yes |No |Yes
|Used for output |No |Yes |Yes
|Must set parameter value |Yes |No |Yes
|Must call registerOutParameter() |No |Yes |Yes
|Can include ?= |No |Yes |Yes

## VI. Using Additional Options

So far, we’ve been creating **PreparedStatement** and **CallableStatement** with the
default options. Both support **ResultSet** type and concurrency options. Not all options
are available on all databases. Luckily, you just have to be able to recognize them as valid
on the exam. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
There are three ResultSet integer type values:
- **ResultSet.TYPE_FORWARD_ONLY**: Can go through the **ResultSet** only one row at a time
- **ResultSet.TYPE_SCROLL_INSENSITIVE**: Can go through the **ResultSet** in any
order but will not see changes made to the underlying database table
- **ResultSet.TYPE_SCROLL_SENSITIVE**: Can go through the **ResultSet** in any order
and will see changes made to the underlying database table
There are two **ResultSet** integer concurrency mode values:
- **ResultSet.CONCUR_READ_ONLY**: The ResultSet cannot be updated.
- **ResultSet.CONCUR_UPDATABLE**: The ResultSet can be updated.

&emsp;&emsp;
These options are integer values, not enum values, which means you pass both as additional parameters after the SQL.

```java
conn.prepareCall(sql, ResultSet.TYPE_FORWARD_ONLY,
    ResultSet.CONCUR_READ_ONLY);

conn.prepareStatement(sql, ResultSet.TYPE_SCROLL_INSENSITIVE, 
    ResultSet.CONCUR_UPDATABLE);
```

> #### Tip
> If you see these options on the exam, pay attention to how they are used.
Remember that type always comes first. Also, the methods that take type
also take concurrency mode, so be wary of any question that only passes
one option.
