# Controlling Data with Transactions

Until now, any changes we made to the database took effect right away. A _commit_ is like
saving a file. On the exam, changes commit automatically unless otherwise specified. However, 
you can change this behavior to control commits yourself. A _transaction_ is when one or
more statements are grouped with the final results committed or rolled back. _Rollback_ is like
closing a file without saving. All the changes from the start of the transaction are discarded.
First, we look at writing code to commit and roll back. Then we look at how to control your
rollback points.

## I. Committing and Rolling Back
Our zoo is renovating and has decided to give more space to the elephants. However, we
only have so much space, so the zebra exhibit will need to be made smaller. Since we can’t
invent space out of thin air, we want to ensure that the total amount of space remains the
same. If either adding space for the elephants or removing space for the zebras fails, we want
our transaction to roll back. In the interest of simplicity, we assume that the database table is
in a valid state before we run this code. Now, let’s examine the code for this scenario:

```
5: public static void main(String[] args) throws SQLException {
6:  try (Connection conn = 
7:      DriverManager.getConnection("jdbc:hsqldb:file:zoo")) {
8:
9:      conn.setAutoCommit(false);
10:
11:     var elephantRowsUpdated = updateRow(conn, 5, "African Elephant");
12:     var zebraRowsUpdated = updateRow(conn, -5, "Zebra");
13: 
14:     if (! elephantRowsUpdated || ! zebraRowsUpdated)
15:         conn.rollback();
16:     else {
17:         String selectSql = """
18:             SELECT COUNT(*) 
19:             FROM exhibits 
20:             WHERE num_acres <= 0""";
21:         try (PreparedStatement ps = conn.prepareStatement(selectSql);
22:             ResultSet rs = ps.executeQuery()) {
23: 
24:             rs.next();
25:             int count = rs.getInt(1);
26:             if (count == 0)
27:                 conn.commit();
28:             else
29:                 conn.rollback();
30:         } } } }
31:
32: private static boolean updateRow(Connection conn,
33:     int numToAdd, String name)
34:
35:     throws SQLException {
36:
37:     String updateSql = """
38:         UPDATE exhibits 
39:         SET num_acres = num_acres + ? 
40:         WHERE name = ?""";
41:
42:     try (PreparedStatement ps = conn.prepareStatement(updateSql)) {
43:         ps.setInt(1, numToAdd);
44:         ps.setString(2, name);
45:         return ps.executeUpdate() > 0;
46:     } }
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The first interesting thing in this example is on line 9, where we turn off autocommit
mode and declare that we will handle transactions ourselves. Most databases support 
disabling autocommit mode. If a database does not, it will throw a **SQLException** on line 9.
We then attempt to update the number of acres allocated to each animal. If we are unsuccessful 
and no rows are updated, we roll back the transaction on line 15, causing the state of
the database to remain unchanged. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Assuming at least one row is updated, we check **exhibits** and make sure none of the
rows contain an invalid **num_acres** value. If this were a real application, we would have
more logic to make sure the amount of space makes sense. On lines 26–30, we decide
whether to commit the transaction to the database or roll back all updates made to the
**exhibits** table.

> #### Autocommit Edge Cases
> You need to know two edge cases for the exam. First, calling `setAutoCommit(true)` will
automatically trigger a commit when you are not already in autocommit mode. After that,
autocommit mode takes effect, and each statement is automatically committed.
> 
> The other edge case is what happens if you have autocommit set to **false** and close
your connection without rolling back or committing your changes. The answer is that the
behavior is undefined. It may commit or roll back, depending solely on the driver. Don’t
depend on this behavior; remember to commit or roll back at the end of a transaction!

## II. Bookmarking with Savepoints
So far, we have rolled back to the point where autocommit was turned off. You can use savepoints 
to have more control of the rollback point. Consider the following example

```
20: conn.setAutoCommit(false);
21: Savepoint sp1 = conn.setSavepoint();
22: // database code
23: Savepoint sp2 = conn.setSavepoint("second savepoint");
24: // database code
25: conn.rollback(sp2);
26: // database code
27: conn.rollback(sp1);
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Line 20 is important. You can only use savepoints when you are controlling the transaction. 
Lines 21 and 23 show how to create a **Savepoint**. The name is optional and typically
included in the `toString()` if you print the savepoint reference. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Line 25 shows the first rollback. That gets rid of any changes made since that savepoint
was created: in this case, the code on line 24. Then line 27 shows the second rollback getting
rid of the code on line 22. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Order matters. If we reversed lines 25 and 27, the code would throw an exception.
Rolling back to **sp1** gets rid of any changes made after that, which includes the second savepoint! 
Similarly, calling `conn.rollback()` on line 25 would void both savepoints, and line
27 would again throw an exception.

## III. Reviewing Transaction APIs
There aren’t many methods for working with transactions, but you need to know all of the
ones in Table 15.9.

> **Table 15.9** **Connection** APIs for transactions
> 
> |Method|Description|
> |---|---|
> |setAutoCommit(boolean b) |Sets mode for whether to commit right away
> |commit() |Saves data in database
> |rollback() |Gets rid of statements already made
> |rollback(Savepoint sp) |Goes back to state at Savepoint
> |setSavepoint() |Creates bookmark
> |setSavepoint(String name) |Creates bookmark with name
