# Closing Database Resources
As you saw in Chapter 14, “I/O,” it is important to close resources when you are finished 
with them. This is true for JDBC as well. JDBC resources, such as a **Connection**,
are expensive to create. Not closing them creates a resource leak that will eventually slow
your program. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Throughout the chapter, we’ve been using the try-with-resources syntax from Chapter 11.
The resources need to be closed in a specific order. The **ResultSet** is closed first, followed
by the **PreparedStatement** (or **CallableStatement**) and then the **Connection**. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
While it is a good habit to close all three resources, it isn’t strictly necessary.
Closing a JDBC resource should close any resources that it created. In particular, the
following are true:
- Closing a **Connection** also closes **PreparedStatement** (or **CallableStatement**)
and **ResultSet**.
- Closing a **PreparedStatement** (or **CallableStatement**) also closes the **ResultSet**.

&emsp;&emsp;
It is important to close resources in the right order. This avoids both resource leaks and
exceptions.

> #### Writing a Resource Leak
> In Chapter 11, you learned that it is possible to declare a type before a try-with-resources
statement. Do you see why this method is bad?
> 
> ```
> 40:   public void bad() throws SQLException {
> 41:       var url = "jdbc:hsqldb:zoo";
> 42:       var sql = "SELECT not_a_column FROM names";
> 43:       var conn = DriverManager.getConnection(url);
> 44:       var ps = conn.prepareStatement(sql);
> 45:       var rs = ps.executeQuery();
> 46:
> 47:       try (conn; ps; rs) {
> 48:           while (rs.next())
> 49:           System.out.println(rs.getString(1));
> 50:       }
> 51:   }
> ```
> 
> Suppose an exception is thrown on line 45. The try-with-resources block is never entered, so
we don’t benefit from automatic resource closing. That means this code has a resource leak
if it fails. Do not write code like this.

&emsp;&emsp;
There’s another way to close a **ResultSet**. JDBC automatically closes a **ResultSet** when you
run another SQL statement from the same **Statement**. This could be a **PreparedStatement** or a
**CallableStatement**.

> ### Real World Scenario
> #### Dealing with Exceptions
> In most of this chapter, we’ve lived in a perfect world. Sure, we mentioned that a checked
**SQLException** might be thrown by any JDBC method—but we never caught it. We just
declared it and let the caller deal with it. Now let’s catch the exception.
> 
> ```
>       var sql = "SELECT not_a_column FROM names";
>       var url = "jdbc:hsqldb:zoo";
>       try (var conn = DriverManager.getConnection(url);
>           var ps = conn.prepareStatement(sql);
>           var rs = ps.executeQuery()) {
>           while (rs.next())
>               System.out.println(rs.getString(1));
>       } catch (SQLException e) {
>           System.out.println(e.getMessage());
>           System.out.println(e.getSQLState());
>           System.out.println(e.getErrorCode());
>       }
> ```
> 
> The output looks like this:
> 
> ```
>       Column 'NOT_A_COLUMN' is either not in any table ...
>       42X04
>       30000
> ```
> 
> Each of these methods gives you a different piece of information. The `getMessage()`
method returns a human-readable message about what went wrong. We’ve only included
the beginning of it here. The `getSQLState()` method returns a code as to what went
wrong. You can Google the name of your database and the SQL state to get more
information about the error. In comparison, `getErrorCode()` is a database-specific code.
On this database, it doesn’t do anything.
