# Loading Properties with Resource Bundles
Up until now, we’ve kept all of the text strings displayed to our users as part of the program
inside the classes that use them. Localization requires externalizing them to elsewhere. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
A _resource bundle_ contains the locale-specific objects to be used by a program. It is like a
map with keys and values. The resource bundle is commonly stored in a properties file.
A _properties file_ is a text file in a specific format with key/value pairs. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Our zoo program has been successful. We are now getting requests to use it at three more
zoos! We already have support for U.S.-based zoos. We now need to add Zoo de La Palmyre
in France, the Greater Vancouver Zoo in English-speaking Canada, and Zoo de Granby in
French-speaking Canada. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
We immediately realize that we are going to need to internationalize our program.
Resource bundles will be quite helpful. They will let us easily translate our application to
multiple locales or even support multiple locales at once. It will also be easy to add more
locales later if zoos in even more countries are interested. We thought about which locales
we need to support, and we came up with four:

```java
Locale us = new Locale("en", "US");
Locale france = new Locale("fr", "FR");
Locale englishCanada = new Locale("en", "CA");
Locale frenchCanada = new Locale("fr", "CA");
```

&emsp;&emsp;
In the next sections, we create a resource bundle using properties files. It is conceptually
similar to a **Map<String,String>**, with each line representing a different key/value. The
key and value are separated by an equal sign (=) or colon (:). To keep things simple, we use
an equal sign throughout this chapter. We also look at how Java determines which resource
bundle to use.

## I. Creating a Resource Bundle
We’re going to update our application to support the four locales listed previously. Luckily,
Java doesn’t require us to create four different resource bundles. If we don’t have a 
country-specific resource bundle, Java will use a language-specific one. It’s a bit more involved than
this, but let’s start with a simple example. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
For now, we need English and French properties files for our Zoo resource bundle. First,
create two properties files.

```java
Zoo_en.properties
hello=Hello
open=The zoo is open
        
Zoo_fr.properties
hello=Bonjour
open=Le zoo est ouvert
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The filenames match the name of our resource bundle, Zoo. They are then followed by an
underscore (_), target locale, and .properties file extension. We can write our very first
program that uses a resource bundle to print this information.

```java
10: public static void printWelcomeMessage(Locale locale) {
11:     var rb = ResourceBundle.getBundle("Zoo", locale);
12:     System.out.println(rb.getString("hello")
13:         + ", " + rb.getString("open"));
14: }
15: public static void main(String[] args) {
16:     var us = new Locale("en", "US");
17:     var france = new Locale("fr", "FR");
18:     printWelcomeMessage(us);        // Hello, The zoo is open
19:     printWelcomeMessage(france);    // Bonjour, Le zoo est ouvert
20: }
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Lines 16 and 17 create the two locales that we want to test, but the method on lines
10–14 does the actual work. Line 11 calls a factory method on **ResourceBundle** to get the
right resource bundle. Lines 12 and 13 retrieve the right string from the resource bundle and
print the results. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Since a resource bundle contains key/value pairs, you can even loop through them to list
all of the pairs. The **ResourceBundle** class provides a `keySet()` method to get a set of all keys.

```java
var us = new Locale("en", "US");
ResourceBundle rb = ResourceBundle.getBundle("Zoo", us);
rb.keySet().stream()
    .map(k -> k + ": " + rb.getString(k))
    .forEach(System.out::println);
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This example goes through all of the keys. It maps each key to a **String** with both the
key and the value before printing everything.

```java
hello: Hello
open: The zoo is open
```

> ### Real World Scenario
> #### Loading Resource Bundle Files at Runtime
> For the exam, you don’t need to know where the properties files for the resource bundles
are stored. If the exam provides a properties file, it is safe to assume that it exists and is
loaded at runtime. <br /><br />
> In your own applications, though, the resource bundles can be stored in a variety of places.
While they can be stored inside the JAR that uses them, doing so is not recommended. This
approach forces you to rebuild the application JAR any time some text changes. One of
the benefits of using resource bundles is to decouple the application code from the 
locale-specific text data. <br /><br />
> Another approach is to have all of the properties files in a separate properties JAR or folder
and load them in the classpath at runtime. In this manner, a new language can be added
without changing the application JAR.

## II. Picking a Resource Bundle
There are two methods for obtaining a resource bundle that you should be familiar with
for the exam.

```java
ResourceBundle.getBundle("name");
ResourceBundle.getBundle("name", locale);
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The first uses the default locale. You are likely to use this one in programs that you
write. Either the exam tells you what to assume as the default locale, or it uses the 
second approach. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Java handles the logic of picking the best available resource bundle for a given key. It tries
to find the most specific value. Table 11.11 shows what Java goes through when asked for
resource bundle **Zoo** with the locale `new Locale("fr", "FR")` when the default locale is
U.S. English.

> **Table 11.11** Picking a resource bundle for French/France with default locale English/US
>
> |Step|Looks for file|Reason|
> |----|--------------|------|
> |1 |Zoo_fr_FR.properties |Requested locale|
> |2 |Zoo_fr.properties |Language we requested with no country|
> |3 |Zoo_en_US.properties |Default locale|
> |4 |Zoo_en.properties |Default locale’s language with no country|
> |5 |Zoo.properties |No locale at all—default bundle|
> |6 |If still not found, throw MissingResourceException |No locale or default bundle available|

&emsp;&emsp;
As another way of remembering the order of Table 11.11, learn these steps:
1. Look for the resource bundle for the requested locale, followed by the one for the
   default locale.
2. For each locale, check the language/country, followed by just the language.
3. Use the default resource bundle if no matching locale can be found.

> #### Note
> As we mentioned earlier, Java supports resource bundles from Java
classes and properties alike. When Java is searching for a matching
resource bundle, it will first check for a resource bundle file with the
matching class name. For the exam, you just need to know how to work
with properties files.

&emsp;&emsp;
Let’s see if you understand Table 11.11. What is the maximum number of files that
Java would need to consider in order to find the appropriate resource bundle with the 
following code?

```java
Locale.setDefault(new Locale("hi"));
ResourceBundle rb = ResourceBundle.getBundle("Zoo", new Locale("en"));
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The answer is three. They are listed here:
1. Zoo_en.properties
2. Zoo_hi.properties
3. Zoo.properties

&emsp;&emsp;
The requested locale is en, so we start with that. Since the en locale does not contain a
country, we move on to the default locale, hi. Again, there’s no country, so we end with the
default bundle.

## III. Selecting Resource Bundle Values
Got all that? Good—because there is a twist. The steps that we’ve discussed so far are
for finding the matching resource bundle to use as a base. Java isn’t required to get all of
the keys from the same resource bundle. It can get them from any parent of the matching
resource bundle. A parent resource bundle in the hierarchy just removes components of the
name until it gets to the top. Table 11.12 shows how to do this.

> **Table 11.12** Selecting resource bundle properties
> 
> |Matching resource bundle|Properties files keys can come from|
> |------------------------|-----------------------------------|
> |Zoo_fr_FR |Zoo_fr_FR.properties<br/>Zoo_fr.properties<br/>Zoo.properties|

&emsp;&emsp;
Once a resource bundle has been selected, only properties along a single hierarchy will be
used. Contrast this behavior with Table 11.11, in which the default en_US resource bundle is
used if no other resource bundles are available. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
What does this mean, exactly? Assume the requested locale is **fr_FR** and the default is
**en_US**. The **JVM** will provide data from **en_US** _only if there is no matching fr_FR or fr
resource bundle_. If it finds a **fr_FR** or **fr** resource bundle, then only those bundles, along
with the default bundle, will be used. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Let’s put all of this together and print some information about our zoos. We have a
number of properties files this time.

```java
Zoo.properties
name=Vancouver Zoo

Zoo_en.properties
hello=Hello
open=is open
        
Zoo_en_US.properties
name=The Zoo
        
Zoo_en_CA.properties
visitors=Canada visitors
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Suppose that we have a visitor from Québec (which has a default locale of French
Canada) who has asked the program to provide information in English. What do you think
this outputs?

```java
11: Locale.setDefault(new Locale("en", "US"));
12: Locale locale = new Locale("en", "CA");
13: ResourceBundle rb = ResourceBundle.getBundle("Zoo", locale);
14: System.out.print(rb.getString("hello"));
15: System.out.print(". ");
16: System.out.print(rb.getString("name"));
17: System.out.print(" ");
18: System.out.print(rb.getString("open"));
19: System.out.print(" ");
20: System.out.print(rb.getString("visitors"));
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The program prints the following:

```java
Hello. Vancouver Zoo is open Canada visitors
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The default locale is en_US, and the requested locale is **en_CA**. First, Java goes
through the available resource bundles to find a match. It finds one right away with
**Zoo_en_CA.properties**. This means the default locale of **en_US** is irrelevant. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Line 14 doesn’t find a match for the key **hello** in **Zoo_en_CA.properties**, so it goes
up the hierarchy to **Zoo_en.properties**. Line 16 doesn’t find a match for name in either of
the first two properties files, so it has to go all the way to the top of the hierarchy to
****. Line 1Zoo.properties8 has the same experience as line 14, using **Zoo_en.properties**.
Finally, line 20 has an easier job of it and finds a matching key in **Zoo_en_CA.properties**. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
In this example, only three properties files were used: **Zoo_en_CA.properties**,
**Zoo_en.properties**, and **Zoo.properties**. Even when the property wasn’t found in
**en_CA** or en resource bundles, the program preferred using **Zoo.properties** (the default
resource bundle) rather than **Zoo_en_US.properties** (the default locale). <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
What if a property is not found in any resource bundle? Then an exception is thrown. For
example, attempting to call `rb.getString("close")` in the previous program results in a
**MissingResourceException** at runtime.

## IV. Formatting Messages
Often we just want to output the text data from a resource bundle, but sometimes you
want to format that data with parameters. In real programs, it is common to substitute 
variables in the middle of a resource bundle string. The convention is to use a number inside
braces such as **{0}**, **{1}**, etc. The number indicates the order in which the parameters will
be passed. Although resource bundles don’t support this directly, the **MessageFormat**
class does. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
For example, suppose that we had this property defined:

```java
helloByName=Hello, {0} and {1}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
In Java, we can read in the value normally. After that, we can run it through the
**MessageFormat** class to substitute the parameters. The second parameter to `format()` is a
vararg, allowing you to specify any number of input values. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Suppose we have a resource bundle rb:

```java
String format = rb.getString("helloByName");
System.out.print(MessageFormat.format(format, "Tammy", "Henry"));
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This will print the following:

```java
Hello, Tammy and Henry
```

## V. Using the _Properties_ Class
When working with the ResourceBundle class, you may also come across the **Properties**
class. It functions like the **HashMap** class that you learned about in Chapter 9, “Collections
and Generics,” except that it uses **String** values for the keys and values. Let’s create one
and set some values.

```java
import java.util.Properties;
public class ZooOptions {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        var props = new Properties();
        props.setProperty("name", "Our zoo");
        props.setProperty("open", "10am");
    }
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The **Properties** class is commonly used in handling values that may not exist.

```java
System.out.println(props.getProperty("camel"));         // null
System.out.println(props.getProperty("camel", "Bob"));  // Bob
```

&emsp;&emsp;
If a key were passed that actually existed, both statements would print it. This is 
commonly referred to as providing a default, or a backup value, for a missing key. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The **Properties** class also includes a `get()` method, but only `getProperty()` allows for a default
value. For example, the following call is invalid since `get()` takes only a single parameter:

```java
props.get("open");                              // 10am

props.get("open", "The zoo will be open soon"); // DOES NOT COMPILE
```
