# Creating Threads with the Concurrency API

Java includes the **java.util.concurrent** package, which we refer to as the Concurrency
API, to handle the complicated work of managing threads for you. The Concurrency
API includes the **ExecutorService** interface, which defines services that create and 
manage threads. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
You first obtain an instance of an **ExecutorService** interface, and then you send the service
tasks to be processed. The framework includes numerous useful features, such as thread
pooling and scheduling. It is recommended that you use this framework any time you need
to create and execute a separate task, even if you need only a single thread.

> #### Tip
> When writing multithreaded programs in practice, it is often better to use
the Concurrency API (or some other multithreaded SDK) rather than work
with **Thread** objects directly. The libraries are much more robust, and it
is easier to handle complex interactions.

## I. Introducing the Single-Thread Executor
Since **ExecutorService** is an interface, how do you obtain an instance of it? The
Concurrency API includes the **Executors** factory class that can be used to create instances
of the **ExecutorService** object. Let’s rewrite our earlier example with the two **Runnable**
instances to using an **ExecutorService**.

```java
ExecutorService service = Executors.newSingleThreadExecutor();
try {
    System.out.println("begin");
    service.execute(printInventory);
    service.execute(printRecords);
    service.execute(printInventory);
    System.out.println("end");
} finally {
    service.shutdown();
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
In this example, we use the `newSingleThreadExecutor()` method to create the 
service. Unlike our earlier example, in which we had four threads (one `main()` and three new
threads), we have only two threads (one `main()` and one new thread). This means that the
output, while still unpredictable, will have less variation than before. For example, the 
following is one possible output:

```
begin
Printing zoo inventory
Printing record: 0
Printing record: 1
end
Printing record: 2
Printing zoo inventory
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Notice that the **printRecords** loop is no longer interrupted by other **Runnable** tasks
sent to the thread executor. With a single-thread executor, tasks are guaranteed to be executed
sequentially. Notice that the end text is output while our thread executor tasks are still running.
This is because the `main()` method is still an independent thread from the **ExecutorService**.

## II. Shutting Down a Thread Executor
Once you have finished using a thread executor, it is important that you call the `shutdown()`
method. A thread executor creates a _non-daemon_ thread on the first task that is executed, so
failing to call `shutdown()` will result in your application _never terminating_. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The shutdown process for a thread executor involves first rejecting any new tasks submitted 
to the thread executor while continuing to execute any previously submitted tasks.
During this time, calling `isShutdown()` will return true, while `isTerminated()` will
return false. If a new task is submitted to the thread executor while it is shutting down,
a **RejectedExecutionException** will be thrown. Once all active tasks have been completed, 
`isShutdown()` and `isTerminated()` will both return true. Figure 13.3 shows the
life cycle of an **ExecutorService** object.

> **Figure 13.3** **ExecutorService** life cycle

For the exam, you should be aware that `shutdown()` does not stop any tasks that have
already been submitted to the thread executor. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
What if you want to cancel all running and upcoming tasks? The **ExecutorService**
provides a method called `shutdownNow()`, which _attempts to stop_ all running tasks and
discards any that have not been started yet. It is not guaranteed to succeed because it is
possible to create a thread that will never terminate, so any attempt to interrupt it may
be ignored.

> #### Tip
> As you learned in Chapter 11, “Exceptions and Localization,” resources
such as thread executors should be properly closed to prevent memory
leaks. Unfortunately, the **ExecutorService** interface does not extend
the **AutoCloseable** interface, so you cannot use a try-with-resources
statement. You can still use a **finally** block, as we do throughout this
chapter. While you are not required to use a **finally** block, it is 
considered a good practice to do so.

## III. Submitting Tasks
You can submit tasks to an **ExecutorService** instance multiple ways. The first
method we presented, `execute()`, is inherited from the **Executor** interface, which the
**ExecutorService** interface extends. The `execute()` method takes a **Runnable** instance
and completes the task asynchronously. Because the return type of the method is void, it
does not tell us anything about the result of the task. It is considered a “fire-and-forget”
method, as once it is submitted, the results are not directly available to the calling thread. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Fortunately, the writers of Java added `submit()` methods to the **ExecutorService**
interface, which, like `execute()`, can be used to complete tasks asynchronously. Unlike
`execute()`, though, `submit()` returns a **Future** instance that can be used to determine
whether the task is complete. It can also be used to return a generic result object after the
task has been completed. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Table 13.1 shows the five methods, including `execute()` and two `submit()` methods,
that you should know for the exam. Don’t worry if you haven’t seen **Future** or **Callable**
before; we discuss them in detail in the next section. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
In practice, using the `submit()` method is quite similar to using the `execute()` method,
except that the `submit()` method returns a **Future** instance that can be used to determine
whether the task has completed execution.

> **Table 13.1** ExecutorService methods
> 
> |Method name|Description|
> |-----------|-----------|
> |void **execute**(Runnable command) |Executes **Runnable** task at some point in future.|
> |Future<?> **submit**(Runnable task) |Executes **Runnable** task at some point in future and returns **Future** representing task.|
> |<T> Future<T> **submit**(Callable<T> task) |Executes **Callable** task at some point in future and returns **Future** representing pending results of task.|
> |<T> List<Future<T>> **invokeAll**(Collection<? extends Callable<T>> tasks) |Executes given tasks and waits for all tasks to complete. Returns **List of Future** instances in same order in which they were in original collection.|
> |<T> T **invokeAny**(Collection<? extends Callable<T>> tasks) |Executes given tasks and waits for at least one to complete.|

> #### Submitting Tasks: _execute()_ vs. _submit()_
> As you might have noticed, the `execute()` and `submit()` methods are nearly identical
when applied to **Runnable** expressions. The `submit()` method has the obvious advantage
of doing the same thing `execute()` does, but with a return object that can be used to
track the result. Because of this advantage and the fact that `execute()` does not support
**Callable** expressions, we tend to prefer `submit()` over `execute()`, even if we don’t
store the **Future** reference.
> 
> For the exam, you need to be familiar with both `execute()` and `submit()`, but in your
own code we recommend `submit()` over `execute()` whenever possible.

## IV. Waiting for Results
How do we know when a task submitted to an **ExecutorService** is complete? As 
mentioned in the previous section, the `submit()` method returns a **Future<V>** instance that can
be used to determine this result.

```java
Future<?> future = service.submit(() -> System.out.println("Hello"));
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The **Future** type is actually an interface. For the exam, you don’t need to know any of
the classes that implement **Future**, just that a **Future** instance is returned by various API
methods. Table 13.2 includes useful methods for determining the state of a task.

> **Table 13.2** Future methods
> 
> |Method name|Description|
> |-----------|-----------|
> |boolean **isDone**() |Returns true if task was completed, threw exception, or was cancelled.
> |boolean **isCancelled**() R|eturns true if task was cancelled before it completed normally.
> |boolean **cancel**(boolean mayInterruptIfRunning) |Attempts to cancel execution of task and returns true if it was successfully cancelled or false if it could not be cancelled or is complete.
> |V **get**() |Retrieves result of task, waiting endlessly if it is not yet available.
> |V **get**(long timeout, TimeUnit unit) |Retrieves result of task, waiting specified amount of time. If result is not ready by time timeout is reached, checked TimeoutException will be thrown.

&emsp;&emsp;
The following is an updated version of our earlier polling example **CheckResults** class,
which uses a Future instance to wait for the results:

```java
import java.util.concurrent.*;
public class CheckResults {
    private static int counter = 0;
    public static void main(String[] unused) throws Exception {
        ExecutorService service = Executors.newSingleThreadExecutor();
        try {
            Future<?> result = service.submit(() -> {
                for(int i = 0; i < 1_000_000; i++) counter++;
            });
            result.get(10, TimeUnit.SECONDS); // Returns null for Runnable
            System.out.println("Reached!");
        } catch (TimeoutException e) {
            System.out.println("Not reached in time");
        } finally {
            service.shutdown();
        } 
    } 
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This example is similar to our earlier polling implementation, but it does not use the
**Thread** class directly. In part, this is the essence of the **Concurrency** API: to do complex
things with threads without having to manage threads directly. It also waits at most 10 
seconds, throwing a **TimeoutException** on the call to `result.get()` if the task is not done. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
What is the return value of this task? As **Future<V>** is a generic interface, the type **V**
is determined by the return type of the **Runnable** method. Since the return type of
`Runnable.run()` is void, the `get()` method always returns null when working with
**Runnable** expressions.
The `Future.get()` method can take an optional value and enum type
**java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit**. Table 13.3 presents the full list of TimeUnit
values since numerous methods in the Concurrency API use this enum.

> **Table 13.3** **TimeUnit** values
> 
> |Enum name|Description|
> |---------|-----------|
> |TimeUnit.NANOSECONDS |Time in one-billionths of a second (1/1,000,000,000)|
> |TimeUnit.MICROSECONDS |Time in one-millionths of a second (1/1,000,000)|
> |TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS |Time in one-thousandths of a second (1/1,000)|
> |TimeUnit.SECONDS |Time in seconds|
> |TimeUnit.MINUTES |Time in minutes|
> |TimeUnit.HOURS |Time in hours|
> |TimeUnit.DAYS |Time in days|

### &emsp;&emsp; 1. Introducing Callable
The **java.util.concurrent.Callable** functional interface is similar to **Runnable**
except that its `call()` method returns a value and can throw a checked exception. 
The following is the definition of the **Callable** interface:

```java
@FunctionalInterface public interface Callable<V> {
    V call() throws Exception;
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The **Callable** interface is often preferable over **Runnable**, since it allows more details
to be retrieved easily from the task after it is completed. That said, we use both interfaces
throughout this chapter, as they are interchangeable in situations where the lambda does not
throw an exception, and there is no return type. Luckily, the **ExecutorService** includes
an overloaded version of the `submit()` method that takes a **Callable** object and returns a
generic **Future<T>** instance. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Unlike **Runnable**, in which the `get()` methods always return null, the `get()` methods
on a **Future** instance return the matching generic type (which could also be a null value).

&emsp;&emsp;
Let’s take a look at an example using **Callable**:

```java
var service = Executors.newSingleThreadExecutor();
try {
    Future<Integer> result = service.submit(() -> 30 + 11);
    System.out.println(result.get()); // 41
} finally {
    service.shutdown();
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
We could rewrite this example using **Runnable**, some shared object, and an `interrupt()`
or timed wait, but this implementation is a lot easier to code and understand. In essence,
that’s the spirit of the Concurrency API, giving you the tools to write multithreaded code
that is thread-safe, performant, and easy to follow.

### &emsp;&emsp; 2. Waiting for All Tasks to Finish
After submitting a set of tasks to a thread executor, it is common to wait for the results. As
you saw in the previous sections, one solution is to call `get()` on each **Future** object returned
by the `submit()` method. If we don’t need the results of the tasks and are finished using our
thread executor, there is a simpler approach. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
First, we shut down the thread executor using the `shutdown()` method. Next, we use the
`awaitTermination()` method available for all thread executors. The method waits the specified
time to complete all tasks, returning sooner if all tasks finish or an **InterruptedException** is
detected. You can see an example of this in the following code snippet:

```java
ExecutorService service = Executors.newSingleThreadExecutor();
try {
    // Add tasks to the thread executor
    ...
} finally {
    service.shutdown();
}
service.awaitTermination(1, TimeUnit.MINUTES);

// Check whether all tasks are finished
if (service.isTerminated()) System.out.println("Finished!");
else System.out.println("At least one task is still running");
```

&emsp;&emsp;
In this example, we submit a number of tasks to the thread executor and then shut
down the thread executor and wait up to one minute for the results. Notice that we can call
`isTerminated()` after the `awaitTermination()` method finishes to confirm that all tasks
are finished.

## V. Scheduling Tasks
Often in Java, we need to schedule a task to happen at some future time. We might even
need to schedule the task to happen repeatedly, at some set interval. For example, imagine
that we want to check the supply of food for zoo animals once an hour and fill it as needed.
**ScheduledExecutorService**, which is a subinterface of **ExecutorService**, can be used
for just such a task. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Like **ExecutorService**, we obtain an instance of **ScheduledExecutorService** using
a factory method in the **Executors** class, as shown in the following snippet:

```java
ScheduledExecutorService service
    = Executors.newSingleThreadScheduledExecutor();
```

&emsp;&emsp;
We could store an instance of **ScheduledExecutorService** in an **ExecutorService**
variable, although doing so would mean we’d have to cast the object to call any 
scheduling methods. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Refer to Table 13.4 for our summary of **ScheduledExecutorService** methods. Each of
these methods returns a **ScheduledFuture** object.

> **Table 13.4** **ScheduledExecutorService** methods
> 
> |Method name|Description|
> |-----------|-----------|
> |**schedule**(Callable<V> callable, long delay, TimeUnit unit) |Creates and executes Callable task after given delay
> |**schedule**(Runnable command, long delay, TimeUnit unit) |Creates and executes Runnable task after given delay
> |**scheduleAtFixedRate**(Runnable command, long initialDelay, long period, TimeUnit unit) |Creates and executes Runnable task after given initial delay, creating new task every period value that passes
> |**scheduleWithFixedDelay**(Runnable command, long initialDelay, long delay, TimeUnit unit) |Creates and executes Runnable task after given initial delay and subsequently with given delay between termination of one execution and commencement of next

&emsp;&emsp;
In practice, these methods are among the most convenient in the Concurrency API, as
they perform relatively complex tasks with a single line of code. The delay and period
parameters rely on the **TimeUnit** argument to determine the format of the value, such as
seconds or milliseconds. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The first two `schedule()` methods in Table 13.4 take a **Callable** or **Runnable**, respectively; 
perform the task after some delay; and return a **ScheduledFuture** instance. The
**ScheduledFuture** interface is identical to the Future interface, except that it includes a
`getDelay()` method that returns the remaining delay. The following uses the `schedule()`
method with **Callable** and **Runnable** tasks:

```java
ScheduledExecutorService service
    = Executors.newSingleThreadScheduledExecutor();
Runnable task1 = () -> System.out.println("Hello Zoo");
Callable<String> task2 = () -> "Monkey";
ScheduledFuture<?> r1 = service.schedule(task1, 10, TimeUnit.SECONDS);
ScheduledFuture<?> r2 = service.schedule(task2, 8, TimeUnit.MINUTES);
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The first task is scheduled 10 seconds in the future, whereas the second task is scheduled
8 minutes in the future.

> #### Note
> While these tasks are scheduled in the future, the actual execution may
be delayed. For example, there may be no threads available to perform
the tasks, at which point they will just wait in the queue. Also, if the
**ScheduledExecutorService** is shut down by the time the scheduled
task execution time is reached, then these tasks will be discarded.

&emsp;&emsp;
Each of the **ScheduledExecutorService** methods is important and has real-world
applications. For example, you can use the `schedule()` command to check on the state
of cleaning a lion’s cage. It can then send out notifications if it is not finished or even call
`schedule()` to check again later. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The last two methods in Table 13.4 might be a little confusing if you have not seen them
before. Conceptually, they are similar as they both perform the same task repeatedly after
an initial delay. The difference is related to the timing of the process and when the next
task starts. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The `scheduleAtFixedRate()` method creates a new task and submits it to the executor
every period, regardless of whether the previous task finished. The following example 
executes a **Runnable** task every minute, following an initial five-minute delay:

```java
service.scheduleAtFixedRate(command, 5, 1, TimeUnit.MINUTES);
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The `scheduleAtFixedRate()` method is useful for tasks that need to be run at specific
intervals, such as checking the health of the animals once a day. Even if it takes two hours to
examine an animal on Monday, this doesn’t mean that Tuesday’s exam should start any later
in the day.

> #### Tip
> Bad things can happen with `scheduleAtFixedRate()` if each task
consistently takes longer to run than the execution interval. Imagine
if your boss came by your desk every minute and dropped off a piece
of paper. Now imagine that it took you five minutes to read each piece
of paper. Before long, you would be drowning in piles of paper. This is
how an executor feels. Given enough time, the program would submit
more tasks to the executor service than could fit in memory, causing the
program to crash.

&emsp;&emsp;
On the other hand, the `scheduleWithFixedDelay()` method creates a new task
only after the previous task has finished. For example, if a task runs at 12:00 and takes
five minutes to finish, with a period between executions of two minutes, the next task will
start at 12:07. 

```java
service.scheduleWithFixedDelay(task1, 0, 2, TimeUnit.MINUTES);
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The `scheduleWithFixedDelay()` method is useful for processes that you want to happen 
repeatedly but whose specific time is unimportant. For example, imagine that we have a
zoo cafeteria worker who periodically restocks the salad bar throughout the day. The process
can take 20 minutes or more, since it requires the worker to haul a large number of items
from the back room. Once the worker has filled the salad bar with fresh food, they don’t
need to check at some specific time, just after enough time has passed for it to become low
on stock again.

## VI. Increasing Concurrency with Pools
All of our examples up until now have been with a single-thread executor, which, while
interesting, weren’t particularly useful. After all, the name of this chapter is “Concurrency,”
and you can’t do a lot of that with a single-thread executor! <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
We now present three additional factory methods in the **Executors** class that act on a
pool of threads rather than on a single thread. A _thread pool_ is a group of pre-instantiated
reusable threads that are available to perform a set of arbitrary tasks. Table 13.5 includes
our two previous single-thread executor methods, along with the new ones that you should
know for the exam.

> **Table 13.5** **Executors** factory methods
> 
> |Method name|Description|
> |-----------|-----------|
> |ExecutorService **newSingleThreadExecutor**() |Creates single-threaded executor that uses single worker thread operating off unbounded queue. Results are processed sequentially in order in which they are submitted.
> |ScheduledExecutorService **newSingleThreadScheduledExecutor**() |Creates single-threaded executor that can schedule commands to run after given delay or to execute periodically.
> |ExecutorService **newCachedThreadPool**() |Creates thread pool that creates new threads as needed but reuses previously constructed threads when they are available.
> |ExecutorService **newFixedThreadPool**(int) |Creates thread pool that reuses fixed number of threads operating off shared unbounded queue.
> |ScheduledExecutorService **newScheduledThreadPool**(int) |Creates thread pool that can schedule commands to run after given delay or execute periodically.

&emsp;&emsp;
As shown in Table 13.5, these methods return the same instance types, **ExecutorService**
and ScheduledExecutorService, that we used earlier in this chapter. In other words, all of
our previous examples are compatible with these new pooled-thread executors! <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The difference between a single-thread and a pooled-thread executor is what happens
when a task is already running. While a single-thread executor will wait for the thread to
become available before running the next task, a pooled-thread executor can execute the
next task concurrently. If the pool runs out of available threads, the task will be queued by
the thread executor and wait to be completed.
