# Using Concurrent Collections

Besides managing threads, the Concurrency API includes interfaces and classes that help you
coordinate access to collections shared by multiple tasks. By collections, we are of course
referring to the Java Collections Framework that we introduced in Chapter 9, “Collections
and Generics.” In this section, we demonstrate many of the concurrent classes available to
you when using the Concurrency API.

## I. Understanding Memory Consistency Errors

The purpose of the concurrent collection classes is to solve common memory consistency
errors. A _memory consistency error_ occurs when two threads have inconsistent views of
what should be the same data. Conceptually, we want writes on one thread to be available to
another thread if it accesses the concurrent collection after the write has occurred. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
When two threads try to modify the same nonconcurrent collection, the JVM may throw
a **ConcurrentModificationException** at runtime. In fact, it can happen with a single
thread. Take a look at the following code snippet:

```
11: var foodData = new HashMap<String, Integer>();
12: foodData.put("penguin", 1);
13: foodData.put("flamingo", 2);
14: for (String key: foodData.keySet())
15:     foodData.remove(key);
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This snippet will throw a **ConcurrentModificationException** during the second
iteration of the loop, since the iterator on `keySet()` is not properly updated after the first
element is removed. Changing the first line to use a **ConcurrentHashMap** will prevent the
code from throwing an exception at runtime.

```
11: var foodData = new ConcurrentHashMap<String, Integer>();
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Although we don’t usually modify a loop variable, this example highlights the fact that
the **ConcurrentHashMap** is ordering read/write access such that all access to the class is
consistent. In this code snippet, the iterator created by `keySet()` is updated as soon as an
object is removed from the **Map**. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The concurrent classes were created to help avoid common issues in which multiple
threads are adding and removing objects from the same collections. At any given instance, all
threads should have the same consistent view of the structure of the collection.

## II. Working with Concurrent Classes

You should use a concurrent collection class any time you have multiple threads modify a
collection outside a synchronized block or method, even if you don’t expect a concurrency
problem. Without the concurrent collections, multiple threads accessing a collection could
result in an exception being thrown or, worse, corrupt data!

> #### Tip
> If the collection is immutable (and contains immutable objects), the
concurrent collections are not necessary. Immutable objects can be
accessed by any number of threads and do not require synchronization.
By definition, they do not change, so there is no chance of a memory consistency error.

&emsp;&emsp;
When passing around a concurrent collection, a caller may need to know the particular
implementation class. That said, it is considered a good practice to pass around a nonconcurrent
interface reference when possible, similar to how we instantiate a **HashMap** but often
pass around a **Map** reference:

```java
Map<String,Integer> map = new ConcurrentHashMap<>();
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Table 13.9 lists the common concurrent classes with which you should be familiar
for the exam.

> **Table 13.9** Concurrent collection classes
> 
> |Class name|Java Collections interfaces|Sorted?|Blocking?|
> |---|---|---|---|
> |ConcurrentHashMap |Map <br /> ConcurrentMap |No |No|
> |ConcurrentLinkedQueue |Queue |No |No|
> |ConcurrentSkipListMap |Map <br/>SortedMap <br/>NavigableMap <br />ConcurrentMap <br/>ConcurrentNavigableMap |Yes |No|
> |ConcurrentSkipListSet |Set <br/>SortedSet <br/>NavigableSet |Yes |No|
> |CopyOnWriteArrayList |List |No |No|
> |CopyOnWriteArraySet |Set |No |No|
> |LinkedBlockingQueue |Queue <br/>BlockingQueue |No |Yes|


&emsp;&emsp;
Most of the classes in Table 13.9 are just concurrent versions of their nonconcurrent
counterpart classes, such as **ConcurrentHashMap** vs. **Map**, or **ConcurrentLinkedQueue**
vs. **Queue**. For the exam, you don’t need to know any class-specific concurrent methods. You
just need to know the inherited methods, such as `get()` and `set()` for **List** instances. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The **Skip** classes might sound strange, but they are just “sorted” versions of the associated 
concurrent collections. When you see a class with **Skip** in the name, just think “sorted
concurrent” collections, and the rest should follow naturally. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The **CopyOnWrite** classes behave a little differently than the other concurrent examples you
have seen. These classes create a copy of the collection any time a reference is added, removed, or
changed in the collection and then update the original collection reference to point to the copy.
These classes are commonly used to ensure an iterator doesn’t see modifications to the collection. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Let’s take a look at how this works with an example:

```java
List<Integer> favNumbers = new CopyOnWriteArrayList<>(List.of(4, 3, 42));
for (var n : favNumbers) {
    System.out.print(n + " ");                      // 4 3 42
    favNumbers.add(n+1);
}
System.out.println();
System.out.println("Size: " + favNumbers.size());   // Size: 6
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Despite adding elements, the iterator is not modified, and the loop executes
exactly three times. Alternatively, if we had used a regular **ArrayList** object, a
**ConcurrentModificationException** would have been thrown at runtime. The
**CopyOnWrite** classes can use a lot of memory, since a new collection structure is created
any time the collection is modified. Therefore, they are commonly used in multithreaded
environment situations where reads are far more common than writes.

> #### Note
> A **CopyOnWrite** instance is similar to an immutable object, as a new
underlying structure is created every time the collection is modified.
Unlike a true immutable object, though, the reference to the object stays
the same even while the underlying data is changed.

&emsp;&emsp;
Finally, Table 13.9 includes **LinkedBlockingQueue**, which implements the concurrent
**BlockingQueue** interface. This class is just like a regular **Queue**, except that it includes
overloaded versions of `offer()` and `poll()` that take a timeout. These methods wait (or
block) up to a specific amount of time to complete an operation.

## III. Obtaining Synchronized Collections
Besides the concurrent collection classes that we have covered, the Concurrency API also
includes methods for obtaining synchronized versions of existing nonconcurrent collection
objects. These synchronized methods are defined in the **Collections** class. They operate on
the inputted collection and return a reference that is the same type as the underlying 
collection. We list these **static** methods in Table 13.10

> **Table 13.10** Synchronized **Collections** methods
> 
> ||
> |---|
> |**synchronizedCollection**(Collection<T> c)
> |**synchronizedList**(List<T> list)
> |**synchronizedMap**(Map<K,V> m)
> |**synchronizedNavigableMap**(NavigableMap<K,V> m)
> |**synchronizedNavigableSet**(NavigableSet<T> s)
> |**synchronizedSet**(Set<T> s)
> |**synchronizedSortedMap**(SortedMap<K,V> m)
> |**synchronizedSortedSet**(SortedSet<T> s)

&emsp;&emsp;
If you’re writing code to create a collection and it requires synchronization, you should
use the classes defined in Table 13.9. On the other hand, if you are passed a nonconcurrent
collection and need synchronization, use the methods in Table 13.10.