# Discovering Modules

So far, we’ve been working with modules that we wrote. Even the classes built into
the JDK are modularized. In this section, we show you how to use commands to learn
about modules. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
You do not need to know the output of the commands in this section. You do, however,
need to know the syntax of the commands and what they do. We include the output where it
facilitates remembering what is going on. But you don’t need to memorize that (which frees
up more space in your head to memorize command-line options).

## I. Identifying Built-in Modules
The most important module to know is **java.base**. It contains most of the packages you
have been learning about for the exam. In fact, it is so important that you don’t even
have to use the **requires** directive; it is available to all modular applications. Your
**module-info.java** file will still compile if you explicitly require **java.base**. However,
it is redundant, so it’s better to omit it. Table 12.6 lists some common modules and what
they contain.

> **Table 12.6** Common modules
> 
> |Module name|What it contains|Coverage in book|
> |---|---|---|
> |java.base |Collections, math, IO, NIO.2, concurrency, etc. |Most of this book|
> |java.desktop |Abstract Windows Toolkit (AWT) and Swing |Not on exam beyond module name|
> |java.logging |Logging |Not on exam beyond module name|
> |java.sql |JDBC |Chapter 15, “JDBC”|
> |java.xml |Extensible Markup Language (XML) |Not on exam beyond module name|

&emsp;&emsp;
The exam creators feel it is important to recognize the names of modules supplied by the
JDK. While you don’t need to know the names by heart, you do need to be able to pick them
out of a lineup. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
For the exam, you need to know that module names begin with **java** for APIs you are
likely to use and with **jdk** for APIs that are specific to the JDK. Table 12.7 lists all the 
modules that begin with **java**.

> **Table 12.7** Java modules prefixed with **java**
>
> ||||
> |---|---|---|
> |java.base |java.naming |java.smartcardio|
> |java.compiler |java.net.http |java.sql|
> |java.datatransfer |java.prefs |java.sql.rowset|
> |java.desktop |java.rmi |java.transaction.xa|
> |java.instrument |java.scripting |java.xml|
> |java.logging |java.se |java.xml.crypto|
> |java.management |java.security.jgss|
> |java.management.rmi |java.security.sasl|

&emsp;&emsp;
Table 12.8 lists all the modules that begin with jdk. We recommend reviewing this right
before the exam to increase the chances of them sounding familiar. Remember that you don’t
have to memorize them.

> **Table 12.8** Java modules prefixed with **jdk**
> 
> ||||
> |---|---|---|
> |jdk.accessiblity |jdk.javadoc |jdk.management.agent|
> |jdk.attach |jdk.jcmd |jdk.management.jfr|
> |jdk.charsets |jdk.jconsole |jdk.naming.dns|
> |jdk.compiler |jdk.jdeps |jdk.naming.rmi|
> |jdk.crypto.cryptoki |jdk.jdi |jdk.net|
> |jdk.crypto.ec |jdk.jdwp.agent |jdk.nio.mapmode|
> |jdk.dynalink |jdk.jfr |jdk.sctp|
> |jdk.editpad |jdk.jlink |jdk.security.auth|
> |jdk.hotspot.agent |jdk.jshell |jdk.security.jgss|
> |jdk.httpserver |jdk.jsobject |jdk.xml.dom|
> |jdk.incubator.foreign |jdk.jstatd |jdk.zipfs|
> |jdk.incubator.vector |jdk.localedata|
> |jdk.jartool |jdk.management|

## II. Getting Details with _java_
The **java** command has three module-related options. One describes a module, another lists
the available modules, and the third shows the module resolution logic.

> #### Note:
> It is also possible to add modules, exports, and more at the command
line. But please don’t. It’s confusing and hard to maintain. Note that these
flags are available on java but not all commands.

### &emsp;&emsp; 1. Describing a Module
Suppose you are given the **zoo.animal.feeding** module JAR file and want to know about
its module structure. You could “unjar” it and open the **module-info.java** file. This would
show you that the module exports one package and doesn’t explicitly require any modules.

```java
module zoo.animal.feeding {
    exports zoo.animal.feeding;
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
However, there is an easier way. The java command has an option to describe a module.
The following two commands are equivalent:

```shell
java -p mods
    -d zoo.animal.feeding
 
java -p mods
 --describe-module zoo.animal.feeding
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Each prints information about the module. For example, it might print this:

```
zoo.animal.feeding file:///absolutePath/mods/zoo.animal.feeding.jar
exports zoo.animal.feeding
requires java.base mandated
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The first line is the module we asked about: **zoo.animal.feeding**. The second line
starts with information about the module. In our case, it is the same package exports 
statement we had in the module declaration file. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
On the third line, we see requires java.base mandated. Now, wait a minute. The
module declaration very clearly does not specify any modules that **zoo.animal.feeding**
has as dependencies. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Remember, the **java.base** module is special. It is automatically added as a dependency
to all modules. This module has frequently used packages like java.util. That’s what the
mandated is about. You get java.base regardless of whether you asked for it. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
In classes, the java.lang package is automatically imported whether you type it or
not. The java.base module works the same way. It is automatically available to all
other modules.

> #### More about Describing Modules
> You only need to know how to run --describe-module for the exam rather than interpret
the output. However, you might encounter some surprises when experimenting with this
feature, so we describe them in a bit more detail here. <br />
>
> Assume the following are the contents of module-info.java in zoo.animal.care:
> 
> ```java
>   module zoo.animal.care {
>       exports zoo.animal.care.medical to zoo.staff;
>       requires transitive zoo.animal.feeding;
>   }
> ```
> Now we have the command to describe the module and the output.
> ```shell
> java -p mods -d zoo.animal.care
>
> zoo.animal.care file:///absolutePath/mods/zoo.animal.care.jar
> requires zoo.animal.feeding transitive
> requires java.base mandated
> qualified exports zoo.animal.care.medical to zoo.staff
> contains zoo.animal.care.details
> ```
> The first line of the output is the absolute path of the module file. The two **requires** lines
should look familiar as well. The first is in the **module-info**, and the other is added to all
modules. Next comes something new. The **qualified exports** is the full name of the
package we are exporting to a specific module. <br /><br />
> Finally, the **contains** means that there is a package in the module that is not exported
at all. This is true. Our module has two packages, and one is available only to code inside
the module.

### &emsp;&emsp; 2. Listing Available Modules
In addition to describing modules, you can use the java command to list the modules that are
available. The simplest form lists the modules that are part of the JDK.

```shell
java --list-modules
```

&emsp;&emsp;
When we ran it, the output went on for 70 lines and looked like this:

```
java.base@17
java.compiler@17
java.datatransfer@17
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This is a listing of all the modules that come with Java and their version numbers. You
can tell that we were using Java 17 when testing this example. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
More interestingly, you can use this command with custom code. Let’s try again with the
directory containing our zoo modules.

```shell
java -p mods --list-modules
```

&emsp;&emsp;
How many lines do you expect to be in the output this time? There are 78 lines now: the
70 built-in modules plus the 8 we’ve created in this chapter. Two of the custom lines look
like this:

```
zoo.animal.care file:///absolutePath/mods/zoo.animal.care.jar
zoo.animal.feeding file:///absolutePath/mods/zoo.animal.feeding.jar
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Since these are custom modules, we get a location on the file system. If the project had a
module version number, it would have both the version number and the file system path.

> #### Note:
> Note that **--list-modules** exits as soon as it prints the observable modules. It does not run the program.

### &emsp;&emsp; 3. Showing Module Resolution
If listing the modules doesn’t give you enough output, you can also use the
**--show-module-resolution** option. You can think of it as a way of debugging modules. It spits
out a lot of output when the program starts up. Then it runs the program.

```shell
java --show-module-resolution
    -p feeding
    -m zoo.animal.feeding/zoo.animal.feeding.Task
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Luckily, you don’t need to understand this output. That said, having seen it will make it
easier to remember. Here’s a snippet of the output:

```
root zoo.animal.feeding file:///absolutePath/feeding/
java.base binds java.desktop jrt:/java.desktop
java.base binds jdk.jartool jrt:/jdk.jartool
...
jdk.security.auth requires java.naming jrt:/java.naming
jdk.security.auth requires java.security.jgss jrt:/java.security.jgss
...
All fed!
```

&emsp;&emsp;
It starts by listing the root module. That’s the one we are running:
**zoo.animal.feeding**. Then it lists many lines of packages included by the
mandatory **java.base** module. After a while, it lists modules that have dependencies.
Finally, it outputs the result of the program: **All fed!**.

## III. Describing with _jar_
Like the java command, the jar command can describe a module. These commands are
equivalent:

```shell
jar -f mods/zoo.animal.feeding.jar -d
jar --file mods/zoo.animal.feeding.jar --describe-module
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The output is slightly different from when we used the **java** command to describe the
module. With jar, it outputs the following:

```
zoo.animal.feeding jar:file:///absolutePath/mods/zoo.animal.feeding.jar
/!module-info.class
exports zoo.animal.feeding
requires java.base mandated
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The JAR version includes the **module-info.class** in the filename, which is not a 
particularly significant difference in the scheme of things. You don’t need 
to know this difference.
You do need to know that both commands can describe a module.

## IV. Learning about Dependencies with _jdeps_
The **jdeps** command gives you information about dependencies within a module. Unlike
describing a module, it looks at the code in addition to the module declaration. This tells
you what dependencies are actually used rather than simply declared. Luckily, you are not
expected to memorize all the options for the exam. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
You are expected to understand how to use **jdeps** with projects that have not yet been
modularized to assist in identifying dependencies and problems. First, we will create a JAR
file from this class. If you are following along, feel free to copy the class from the online
examples referenced at the beginning of the chapter rather than typing it in.

```java
// Animatronic.java
package zoo.dinos;

import java.time.*;
import java.util.*;
import sun.misc.Unsafe;

public class Animatronic {
    private List<String> names;
    private LocalDate visitDate;
    
    public Animatronic(List<String> names, LocalDate visitDate) {
        this.names = names;
        this.visitDate = visitDate;
    }
    public void unsafeMethod() {
        Unsafe unsafe = Unsafe.getUnsafe();
    }
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This example is silly. It uses a number of unrelated classes. The Bronx Zoo really did have
electronic moving dinosaurs for a while, so at least the idea of having dinosaurs in a zoo isn’t
beyond the realm of possibility. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Now we can compile this file. You might have noticed that there is no
**module-info.java** file. That is because we aren’t creating a module. We are looking into
what dependencies we will need when we do modularize this JAR.

```shell
javac zoo/dinos/*.java
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Compiling works, but it gives you some warnings about Unsafe being an internal API.
Don’t worry about those for now—we discuss that shortly. (Maybe the dinosaurs went
extinct because they did something unsafe.) <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Next, we create a JAR file.

```shell
jar -cvf zoo.dino.jar .
```

&emsp;&emsp;
We can run the **jdeps** command against this JAR to learn about its dependencies. First,
let’s run the command without any options. On the first two lines, the command prints the
modules that we would need to add with a **requires** directive to migrate to the module
system. It also prints a table showing what packages are used and what modules they correspond to.

```
jdeps zoo.dino.jar

zoo.dino.jar -> java.base
zoo.dino.jar -> jdk.unsupported
    zoo.dinos   -> java.lang      java.base
    zoo.dinos   -> java.time      java.base
    zoo.dinos   -> java.util      java.base
    zoo.dinos   -> sun.misc       JDK internal API (jdk.unsupported)
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Note that java.base is always included. It also says which modules contain classes used
by the JAR. If we run in summary mode, we only see just the first part where **jdeps** lists the
modules. There are two formats for the summary flag:

```shell
jdeps -s zoo.dino.jar
jdeps -summary zoo.dino.jar

zoo.dino.jar -> java.base
zoo.dino.jar -> jdk.unsupported
```

&emsp;&emsp;
For a real project, the dependency list could include dozens or even hundreds of packages.
It’s useful to see the summary of just the modules. This approach also makes it easier to see
whether **jdk.unsupported** is in the list. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
There is also a **--module-path** option that you can use if you want to look for modules
outside the JDK. Unlike other commands, there is no short form for this option on **jdeps**.

> #### Note
> You might have noticed that **jdk.unsupported** is not in the list of
modules you saw in Table 12.8. It’s special because it contains internal
libraries that developers in previous versions of Java were discouraged
from using, although many people ignored this warning. You should not
reference it, as it may disappear in future versions of Java.

## V. Using the _--jdk-internals_ Flag
The **jdeps** command has an option to provide details about these unsupported APIs. The
output looks something like this:

```
jdeps --jdk-internals zoo.dino.jar

zoo.dino.jar -> jdk.unsupported
    zoo.dinos.Animatronic -> sun.misc.Unsafe
        JDK internal API (jdk.unsupported)
        
Warning: <omitted warning>

JDK Internal API        Suggested Replacement
----------------        ---------------------
sun.misc.Unsafe         See http://openjdk.java.net/jeps/260
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The **--jdk-internals** option lists any classes you are using that call an internal API
along with which API. At the end, it provides a table suggesting what you should do about
it. If you wrote the code calling the internal API, this message is useful. If not, the 
message would be useful to the team that did write the code. You, on the other hand, might
need to update or replace that JAR file entirely with one that fixes the issue. Note that
**-jdkinternals** is equivalent to **--jdk-internals**.

> ### Real World Scenario
> #### About _sun.misc.Unsafe_
> Prior to the Java Platform Module System, classes had to be public if you wanted them
to be used outside the package. It was reasonable to use the class in JDK code since that
is low-level code that is already tightly coupled to the JDK. Since it was needed in multiple
packages, the class was made public. Sun even named it Unsafe, figuring that would
prevent anyone from using it outside the JDK. <br /><br />
> However, developers are clever and used the class since it was available. A number of
widely used open source libraries started using Unsafe. While it is quite unlikely that you
are using this class in your project directly, you probably use an open source library that
is using it. <br /><br />
> The jdeps command allows you to look at these JARs to see whether you will have any
problems when Oracle finally prevents the usage of this class. If you find any uses, you can
look at whether there is a later version of the JAR that you can upgrade to.

## VI. Using Module Files with _jmod_
The final command you need to know for the exam is jmod. You might think a JMOD file is
a Java module file. Not quite. Oracle recommends using JAR files for most modules. JMOD
files are recommended only when you have native libraries or something that can’t go inside
a JAR file. This is unlikely to affect you in the real world. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The most important thing to remember is that jmod is only for working with the JMOD
files. Conveniently, you don’t have to memorize the syntax for jmod. Table 12.9 lists the
common modes.

> **Table 12.9** Modes using jmod
> 
> |Operation|Description|
> |---|---|
> |create |Creates JMOD file.|
> |extract |Extracts all files from JMOD. Works like unzipping.|
> |describe |Prints module details such as requires.|
> |list |Lists all files in JMOD file.|
> |hash |Prints or records hashes.|

## VII. Creating Java Runtimes with _jlink_
One of the benefits of modules is being able to supply just the parts of Java you need. Our
zoo example from the beginning of the chapter doesn’t have many dependencies. If the user
already doesn’t have Java or is on a device without much memory, downloading a JDK
that is over 150 MB is a big ask. Let’s see how big the package actually needs to be! This
command creates our smaller distribution:

```shell
jlink --module-path mods --add-modules zoo.animal.talks --output zooApp
```

&emsp;&emsp;
First we specify where to find the custom modules with **-p** or **--module-path**. Then
we specify our module names with **--add-modules**. This will include the dependencies it
requires as long as they can be found. Finally, we specify the folder name of our smaller JDK
with **--output**. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The output directory contains the **bin**, **conf**, **include**, **legal**, **lib**, and **man** directories
along with a release file. These should look familiar as you find them in the full JDK as well. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
When we run this command and zip up the **zooApp** directory, the file is only 15 MB. This
is an order of magnitude smaller than the full JDK. Where did this space savings come from?
There are many modules in the JDK we don’t need. Additionally, development tools like
javac don’t need to be in a runtime distribution. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
There are a lot more items to customize this process that you don’t need to know for
the exam. For example, you can skip generating the help documentation and save even
more space.

## VIII. Reviewing Command-Line Options
This section presents a number of tables that cover what you need to know about running
command-line options for the exam. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Table 12.10 shows the command-line operations you should expect to encounter on
the exam. There are many more options in the documentation. For example, there is a
**--module** option on javac that limits compilation to that module. Luckily, you don’t need
to know those for the exam.

> **Table 12.10** Comparing command-line operations
> 
> |Description|Syntax|
> |---|---|
> |Compile nonmodular code |**javac** -cp _classpath_ -d _directory_ _classesToCompile_ <br/>**javac** --class-path _classpath_ -d _directory_ _classesToCompile_ <br />**javac** -classpath _classpath_ -d _directory_ _classesToCompile_|
> |Run nonmodular code |**java** -cp _classpath_ _package.className_ <br/> **java** -classpath _classpath_ _package.className_ <br /> **java** --class-path _classpath_ _package.className_|
> |Compile module |**javac** -p _moduleFolderName_ -d _directory_ _classesToCompileIncludingModuleInfo_ <br /> **javac** --module-path _moduleFolderName_ -d _directory_ _classesToCompileIncludingModuleInfo_|
> |Run module |**java** -p _moduleFolderName_ -m _moduleName/package.className_ <br /> **java** --module-path _moduleFolderName_ --module _moduleName/package.className_|
> |Describe module |**java** -p _moduleFolderName_ -d _moduleName_ <br /> **java** --module-path _moduleFolderName_ --describe-module _moduleName_ <br /> **jar** --file _jarName_ --describe-module <br /> **jar** -f _jarName_ -d|
> |List available modules |**java** --module-path _moduleFolderName_ --list-modules <br /> **java** -p _moduleFolderName_ --list-modules <br /> **java** --list-modules|
> |View dependencies |**jdeps** -summary --module-path _moduleFolderName_ _jarName_ <br /> **jdeps** -s --module-path _moduleFolderName_ _jarName_ <br /> **jdeps** --jdk-internals _jarName_ <br /> **jdeps** -jdkinternals _jarName_|
> |Show module resolution |**java** --show-module-resolution -p _moduleFolderName_ -m _moduleName_ <br /> **java** --show-module-resolution --module-path _moduleFolderName_ --module _moduleName_|
> |Create runtime JAR |**jlink** -p _moduleFolderName_ --add-modules _moduleName_ --output _zooApp_ <br /> **jlink** --module-path _moduleFolderName_ --add-modules _moduleName_ --output _zooApp_|

&emsp;&emsp;
Table 12.11 shows the options for **javac**, Table 12.12 shows the options for **java**,
Table 12.13 shows the options for **jar**, and Table 12.14 shows the options for **jdeps**.
Finally, Table 12.15 shows the options for **jlink**.

> **Table 12.11** Options you need to know for the exam: **javac**
> 
> |Option|Description|
> |---|---|
> |-cp <classpath> <br /> -classpath <classpath> <br /> --class-path <classpath> |Location of JARs in nonmodular program|
> |-d <dir> |Directory in which to place generated class files|
> |-p <path> <br /> --module-path <path> |Location of JARs in modular program|

> **Table 12.12** Options you need to know for the exam: **java**
> 
> |Option|Description|
> |---|---|
> |-p <path> <br /> --module-path <path> |Location of JARs in modular program|
> |-m <name> <br /> --module <name> |Module name to run|
> |-d <br /> --describe-module |Describes details of module|
> |--list-modules |Lists observable modules without running program|
> |--show-module-resolution |Shows modules when running program|

> **Table 12.13** Options you need to know for the exam: **jar**
> 
> |Option|Description|
> |---|---|
> |-c <br /> --create |Creates new JAR file|
> |-v <br /> --verbose |Prints details when working with JAR files|
> |-f <br /> --file |JAR filename|
> |-C |Directory containing files to be used to create JAR|
> |-d <br /> --describe-module |Describes details of module|

> **Table 12.14** Options you need to know for the exam: **jdeps**
> 
> |Option|Description|
> |---|---|
> |--module-path <path> |Location of JARs in modular program|
> |-s <br /> -summary |Summarizes output|
> |--jdk-internals <br /> -jdkinternals |Lists uses of internal APIs|

> **Table 12.15** Options you need to know for the exam: **jlink**
> 
> |Option|Description|
> |---|---|
> |-p <br /> --module-path <path> |Location of JARs in modular program|
> |--add-modules |List of modules to package|
> |--output |Name of output directory|

