# Inheriting Members

Now that we’ve created a class, what can we do with it? One of Java’s biggest strengths is
leveraging its inheritance model to simplify code. For example, let’s say you have five classes,
each of which extends from the Animal class. Furthermore, each class defines an eat() method
with an identical implementation. In this scenario, it’s a lot better to define eat() once in the
Animal class than to have to maintain the same method in five separate classes. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Inheriting a class not only grants access to inherited methods in the parent class but also
sets the stage for collisions between methods defined in both the parent class and the 
subclass. In this section, we review the rules for method inheritance and how Java handles such
scenarios. <br/>

&emsp;&emsp;
We refer to the ability of an object to take on many different forms as polymorphism. We
cover this more in the next chapter, but for now you just need to know that an object can be
used in a variety of ways, in part based on the reference variable used to call the object.

## I. Overriding a Method

What if a method with the same signature is defined in both the parent and child classes? For
example, you may want to define a new version of the method and have it behave differently
for that subclass. The solution is to override the method in the child class. In Java, overriding
a method occurs when a subclass declares a new implementation for an inherited method
with the same signature and compatible return type.

> **Note**: <br/>
> Remember that a method signature is composed of the name of the
method and method parameters. It does not include the return type,
access modifiers, optional specifiers, or any declared exceptions.

&emsp;&emsp;
When you override a method, you may still reference the parent version of the method
using the super keyword. In this manner, the keywords this and super allow you to select
between the current and parent versions of a method, respectively. We illustrate this with the
following example:

```java
public class Marsupial {
    public double getAverageWeight() {
        return 50;
    }
}
public class Kangaroo extends Marsupial {
    public double getAverageWeight() {
        return super.getAverageWeight()+20;
    }
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println(new Marsupial().getAverageWeight()); // 50.0
        System.out.println(new Kangaroo().getAverageWeight()); // 70.0
    }
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
In this example, the Kangaroo class overrides the getAverageWeight() method but in
the process calls the parent version using the super reference.

> **Method Overriding Infinite Calls** <br/>
> You might be wondering whether the use of super in the previous example was required.
For example, what would the following code output if we removed the super keyword?
> ```java
>  public double getAverageWeight() {
>       return getAverageWeight() + 20; // StackOverflowError
>  }
> ```
> In this example, the compiler would not call the parent Marsupial method; it would call
the current Kangaroo method. The application will attempt to call itself infinitely and 
produce a StackOverflowError at runtime.

&emsp;&emsp;
To override a method, you must follow a number of rules. The compiler performs the following checks when you override a method:
1. The method in the child class must have the same signature as the method in the
   parent class.
2. The method in the child class must be at least as accessible as the method in the
   parent class.
3. The method in the child class may not declare a checked exception that is new or
   broader than the class of any exception declared in the parent class method.
4. If the method returns a value, it must be the same or a subtype of the method in the 
   parent class, known as *covariant return types*.

&emsp;&emsp;
While these rules may seem confusing or arbitrary at first, they are needed for consistency.
Without these rules in place, it is possible to create contradictions within the Java language.

## II. Rule #1: Method Signatures
The first rule of overriding a method is somewhat self-explanatory. If two methods have the
same name but different signatures, the methods are overloaded, not overridden. Overloaded
methods are considered independent and do not share the same polymorphic properties as
overridden methods.

> **Note**: <br/>
> We covered overloading a method in Chapter 5, and it is similar to 
overriding a method, as both involve defining a method using the same name.
Overloading differs from overriding in that overloaded methods use a
different parameter list. For the exam, it is important that you understand
this distinction and that overridden methods have the same signature and
a lot more rules than overloaded methods.

## III. Rule #2: Access Modifiers
What’s the purpose of the second rule about access modifiers? Let’s try an illustrative example:
```java
public class Camel {
    public int getNumberOfHumps() {
        return 1;
    } 
}
public class BactrianCamel extends Camel {
    private int getNumberOfHumps() { // DOES NOT COMPILE
        return 2;
    } 
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
In this example, BactrianCamel attempts to override the getNumberOfHumps() method
defined in the parent class but fails because the access modifier private is more restrictive
than the one defined in the parent version of the method. Let’s say BactrianCamel was
allowed to compile, though. Would this class compile?

```java
public class Rider {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Camel c = new BactrianCamel();
        System.out.print(c.getNumberOfHumps()); // ???
    } 
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The answer is, we don’t know. The reference type for the object is Camel, where the
method is declared public, but the object is actually an instance of type BactrianCamel,
where the method is declared private. Java avoids these types of ambiguity problems by
limiting overriding a method to access modifiers that are as accessible or more accessible
than the version in the inherited method.

## IV. Rule #3: Checked Exceptions
The third rule says that overriding a method cannot declare new checked exceptions or
checked exceptions broader than the inherited method. This is done for polymorphic reasons
similar to limiting access modifiers. In other words, you could end up with an object that is
more restrictive than the reference type it is assigned to, resulting in a checked exception that
is not handled or declared. One implication of this rule is that overridden methods are free
to declare any number of new unchecked exceptions.

> **Note**: <br/>
> If you don’t know what a checked or unchecked exception is, don’t worry.
We cover this in Chapter 11, “Exceptions and Localization.” For now, you
just need to know that the rule applies only to checked exceptions. It’s also
helpful to know that both IOException and FileNotFoundException
are checked exceptions and that FileNotFoundException is a subclass
of IOException.

&emsp;&emsp;
Let’s try an example:

```java
public class Reptile {
    protected void sleep() throws IOException {}
    protected void hide() {}
    protected void exitShell() throws FileNotFoundException {}
}

public class GalapagosTortoise extends Reptile {
    public void sleep() throws FileNotFoundException {}
    public void hide() throws FileNotFoundException {} // DOES NOT COMPILE
    public void exitShell() throws IOException {} // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
In this example, we have three overridden methods. These overridden methods use
the more accessible public modifier, which is allowed per our second rule for 
overridden methods. The first overridden method sleep() in GalapagosTortoise compiles
without issue because the declared exception is narrower than the exception declared in the
parent class. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The overridden hide() method does not compile because it declares a new checked
exception not present in the parent declaration. The overridden exitShell() also does not 
compile, since IOException is a broader checked exception than FileNotFoundException. We revisit
these exception classes, including memorizing which ones are subclasses of each other, in
Chapter 11.

## V. Rule #4: Covariant Return Types
The fourth and final rule around overriding a method is probably the most complicated, as
it requires knowing the relationships between the return types. The overriding method must
use a return type that is covariant with the return type of the inherited method. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Let’s try an example for illustrative purposes:

```java
public class Rhino {
    protected CharSequence getName() {
        return "rhino";
    }
    protected String getColor() {
        return "grey, black, or white";
    } 
}

public class JavanRhino extends Rhino {
    public String getName() {
        return "javan rhino";
    }
    public CharSequence getColor() { // DOES NOT COMPILE
        return "grey";
    } 
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The subclass JavanRhino attempts to override two methods from Rhino: getName()
and getColor(). Both overridden methods have the same name and signature as the 
inherited methods. The overridden methods also have a broader access modifier, public, than
the inherited methods. Remember, a broader access modifier is acceptable in an overridden method. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
From Chapter 4, “Core APIs,” we learned that String implements the CharSequence
interface, making String a subtype of CharSequence. Therefore, the return type of
getName() in JavanRhino is covariant with the return type of getName() in Rhino. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
On the other hand, the overridden getColor() method does not compile because
CharSequence is not a subtype of String. To put it another way, all String values are
CharSequence values, but not all CharSequence values are String values. For instance, a
StringBuilder is a CharSequence but not a String. For the exam, you need to know if
the return type of the overriding method is the same as or a subtype of the return type of the
inherited method.

> **Tip**: <br/>
> A simple test for covariance is the following: given an inherited return
type A and an overriding return type B, can you assign an instance of B
to a reference variable for A without a cast? If so, then they are covariant.
This rule applies to primitive types and object types alike. If one of the
return types is void, then they both must be void, as nothing is covariant with void except itself.

&emsp;&emsp;
That’s everything you need to know about overriding methods for this chapter. In
Chapter 9, “Collections and Generics,” we revisit overriding methods involving generics.
There’s always more to learn!

> **Marking Methods with the *@Override* Annotation**: <br/>
> An annotation is a metadata tag that provides additional information about your code.
You can use the @Override annotation to tell the compiler that you are attempting to
override a method.
> ```java
>   public class Fish {
>       public void swim() {};
>   }
>   public class Shark extends Fish {
>       @Override
>       public void swim() {};
>   }
> ```
> When used correctly, the annotation doesn’t impact the code. On the other hand, when
used incorrectly, this annotation can prevent you from making a mistake. The following
does not compile because of the presence of the @Override annotation:
> ```java
>   public class Fish {
>       public void swim() {};
>   }
>   public class Shark extends Fish {
>       @Override
>       public void swim(int speed) {}; // DOES NOT COMPILE
>   }
> ```
> The compiler sees that you are attempting a method override and looks for an inherited
version of swim() that takes an int value. Since the compiler doesn’t find one, it reports
an error. While knowing advanced topics (such as how to create annotations) is not required
for the exam, knowing how to use them properly is.

## VI. Re-declaring private Methods

What happens if you try to override a private method? In Java, you can’t override private
methods since they are not inherited. Just because a child class doesn’t have access to the
parent method doesn’t mean the child class can’t define its own version of the method. It
just means, strictly speaking, that the new method is not an overridden version of the parent
class’s method. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Java permits you to redeclare a new method in the child class with the same or modified
signature as the method in the parent class. This method in the child class is a separate and
independent method, unrelated to the parent version’s method, so none of the rules for 
overriding methods is invoked. For example, these two declarations compile:

```java
public class Beetle {
    private String getSize() {
        return "Undefined";
    } 
}
 
public class RhinocerosBeetle extends Beetle {
    private int getSize() {
        return 5;
    } 
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Notice that the return type differs in the child method from String to int. In this
example, the method getSize() in the parent class is redeclared, so the method in the child
class is a new method and not an override of the method in the parent class. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
What if getSize() method was declared public in Beetle? In this case, the method in
RhinocerosBeetle would be an invalid override. The access modifier in RhinocerosBeetle
is more restrictive, and the return types are not covariant.

## VII. Hiding Static Methods
A static method cannot be overridden because class objects do not inherit from each other in
the same way as instance objects. On the other hand, they can be hidden. A hidden method
occurs when a child class defines a static method with the same name and signature as an
inherited static method defined in a parent class. Method hiding is similar to but not exactly
the same as method overriding. The previous four rules for overriding a method must be 
followed when a method is hidden. In addition, a new fifth rule is added for hiding a method: <br />

5. The method defined in the child class must be marked as static if it is marked as
   static in a parent class.

&emsp;&emsp;
Put simply, it is method hiding if the two methods are marked static and method 
overriding if they are not marked static. If one is marked static and the other is not, the
class will not compile. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Let’s review some examples of the new rule:

```java
public class Bear {
    public static void eat() {
        System.out.println("Bear is eating");
    } 
}

public class Panda extends Bear {
    public static void eat() {
        System.out.println("Panda is chewing");
    }
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        eat();
    } 
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
In this example, the code compiles and runs. The eat() method in the Panda class hides
the eat() method in the Bear class, printing "Panda is chewing" at runtime. Because
they are both marked as static, this is not considered an overridden method. That said,
there is still some inheritance going on. If you remove the eat() declaration in the Panda
class, then the program prints "Bear is eating" instead. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
See if you can figure out why each of the method declarations in the SunBear class does
not compile:

```java
public class Bear {
    public static void sneeze() {
        System.out.println("Bear is sneezing");
    }
    public void hibernate() {
        System.out.println("Bear is hibernating");
    }
    public static void laugh() {
        System.out.println("Bear is laughing");
    }
}

public class SunBear extends Bear {
    public void sneeze() { // DOES NOT COMPILE
        System.out.println("Sun Bear sneezes quietly");
    }
    public static void hibernate() { // DOES NOT COMPILE
        System.out.println("Sun Bear is going to sleep");
    }
    protected static void laugh() { // DOES NOT COMPILE
        System.out.println("Sun Bear is laughing");
    }
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
In this example, sneeze() is marked static in the parent class but not in the child
class. The compiler detects that you’re trying to override using an instance method. 
However, sneeze() is a static method that should be hidden, causing the compiler to generate
an error. The second method, hibernate(), does not compile for the opposite reason. The
method is marked static in the child class but not in the parent class. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Finally, the laugh() method does not compile. Even though both versions of the method
are marked static, the version in SunBear has a more restrictive access modifier than the one it
inherits, and it breaks the second rule for overriding methods. Remember, the four rules for
overriding methods must be followed when hiding static methods.

## VIII. Hiding Variables

As you saw with method overriding, there are a lot of rules when two methods have the
same signature and are defined in both the parent and child classes. Luckily, the rules for
variables with the same name in the parent and child classes are much simpler. In fact, Java
doesn’t allow variables to be overridden. Variables can be hidden, though. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
A hidden variable occurs when a child class defines a variable with the same name as an
inherited variable defined in the parent class. This creates two distinct copies of the variable
within an instance of the child class: one instance defined in the parent class and one defined
in the child class. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
As when hiding a static method, you can’t override a variable; you can only hide it. Let’s
take a look at a hidden variable. What do you think the following application prints?

```java
class Carnivore {
    protected boolean hasFur = false;
}

public class Meerkat extends Carnivore {
    protected boolean hasFur = true;
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Meerkat m = new Meerkat();
        Carnivore c = m;
        System.out.println(m.hasFur); // true
        System.out.println(c.hasFur); // false
    }
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Confused about the output? Both of these classes define a hasFur variable, but with
different values. Even though only one object is created by the main() method, both 
variables exist independently of each other. The output changes depending on the reference variable used. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
If you didn’t understand the last example, don’t worry. We cover polymorphism in more
detail in the next chapter. For now, you just need to know that overriding a method replaces
the parent method on all reference variables (other than super), whereas hiding a method or
variable replaces the member only if a child reference type is used.

## IX. Writing final Methods
We conclude our discussion of method inheritance with a somewhat self-explanatory rule:
final methods cannot be overridden. By marking a method final, you forbid a child class from
replacing this method. This rule is in place both when you override a method and when you
hide a method. In other words, you cannot hide a static method in a child class if it is marked
final in the parent class.

```java
public class Bird {
    public final boolean hasFeathers() {
        return true;
    }
    public final static void flyAway() {}
}

public class Penguin extends Bird {
    public final boolean hasFeathers() { // DOES NOT COMPILE
        return false;
    }
    public final static void flyAway() {} // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
In this example, the instance method hasFeathers() is marked as final in the 
parent class Bird, so the child class Penguin cannot override the parent method, resulting in
a compiler error. The static method flyAway() is also marked final, so it cannot be
hidden in the subclass. In this example, whether or not the child method uses the final 
keyword is irrelevant—the code will not compile either way. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
This rule applies only to inherited methods. For example, if the two methods were
marked private in the parent Bird class, then the Penguin class, as defined, would compile. In
that case, the private methods would be redeclared, not overridden or hidden.
