# Interacting with Users

Java includes numerous classes for interacting with the user. For example, you might want to
write an application that asks a user to log in and then prints a success message. This section
contains numerous techniques for handling and responding to user input.

## I. Printing Data to the User
Java includes two **PrintStream** instances for providing information to the user:
**System.out** and **System.err**. While **System.out** should be old hat to you,
**System.err** might be new to you. The syntax for calling and using **System.err** is the
same as **System.out** but is used to report errors to the user in a separate I/O stream from
the regular output information.

```java
try (var in = new FileInputStream("zoo.txt")) {
    System.out.println("Found file!");
} catch (FileNotFoundException e) {
    System.err.println("File not found!");
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
How do they differ in practice? In part, that depends on what is executing the program.
For example, if you are running from a command prompt, they will likely print text in the
same format. On the other hand, if you are working in an integrated development environment
(IDE), they might print the **System.err** text in a different color. Finally, if the code is
being run on a server, the **System.err** stream might write to a different log file.

> ### Real World Scenario
> #### Using Logging APIs
> While **System.out** and **System.err** are incredibly useful for debugging stand-alone or
simple applications, they are rarely used in professional software development. Most 
applications rely on a logging service or API.
> While many logging APIs are available, they tend to share a number of similar attributes.
First you create a **static** logging object in each class. Then you log a message with an
appropriate logging level: `debug()`, `info()`, `warn()`, or `error()`. The `debug()` and
`info()` methods are useful as they allow developers to log things that aren’t errors but
may be useful.

## II. Reading Input as an I/O Stream
The **System.in** returns an **InputStream** and is used to retrieve text input from the user.
It is commonly wrapped with a **BufferedReader** via an **InputStreamReader** to use the
`readLine()` method. 

```java
var reader = new BufferedReader(new InputStreamReader(System.in));
String userInput = reader.readLine();
System.out.println("You entered: " + userInput);
```

&emsp;&emsp;
When executed, this application first fetches text from the user until the user presses the
Enter key. It then outputs the text the user entered to the screen.

## III. Closing System Streams
You might have noticed that we never created or closed **System.out**, **System.err**, and
**System.in** when we used them. In fact, these are the only I/O streams in the entire chapter
that we did not use a try-with-resources block on! <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Because these are **static** objects, the **System** streams are shared by the entire application.
The JVM creates and opens them for us. They can be used in a try-with-resources statement
or by calling `close()`, although _closing them is not recommended_. Closing the **System** streams
makes them permanently unavailable for all threads in the remainder of the program. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
What do you think the following code snippet prints?

```java
try (var out = System.out) {}
System.out.println("Hello");
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Nothing. It prints nothing. The methods of **PrintStream** do not throw any checked
exceptions and rely on the `checkError()` to report errors, so they fail silently.
What about this example?

```java
try (var err = System.err) {}
System.err.println("Hello"); 
```

&emsp;&emsp;
This one also prints nothing. Like **System.out**, **System.err** is a **PrintStream**. Even if
it did throw an exception, we’d have a hard time seeing it since our I/O stream for reporting
errors is closed! Closing **System.err** is a particularly bad idea, since the stack traces from
all exceptions will be hidden. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
Finally, what do you think this code snippet does?

```java
var reader = new BufferedReader(new InputStreamReader(System.in));
try (reader) {}
String data = reader.readLine(); // IOException
```

&emsp;&emsp;
It prints an exception at runtime. Unlike the **PrintStream** class, most **InputStream**
implementations will throw an exception if you try to operate on a closed I/O stream.

## IV. Acquiring Input with _Console_
The **java.io.Console** class is specifically designed to handle user interactions. After
all, **System.in** and **System.out** are just raw streams, whereas **Console** is a class with
numerous methods centered around user input. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The **Console** class is a singleton because it is accessible only from a factory method and
only one instance of it is created by the JVM. For example, if you come across code on the
exam such as the following, it does not compile, since the constructors are all **private**:

```java
Console c = new Console(); // DOES NOT COMPILE
```

&emsp;&emsp;
The following snippet shows how to obtain a **Console** and use it to retrieve user input:

```java
Console console = System.console();
if (console != null) {
    String userInput = console.readLine();
    console.writer().println("You entered: " + userInput);
} else {
    System.err.println("Console not available");
}
```

> #### Note
> The **Console** object may not be available, depending on where the code
is being called. If it is not available, `System.console()` returns **null**. It
is imperative that you check for a **null** value before attempting to use a
**Console** object!

&emsp;&emsp;
This program first retrieves an instance of the **Console** and verifies that it is available,
outputting a message to `System.err` if it is not. If it is available, the program retrieves a
line of input from the user and prints the result. As you might have noticed, this example is
equivalent to our earlier example of reading user input with **System.in** and **System.out**.

### &emsp;&emsp; 1. Obtaining Underlying I/O Streams
The **Console** class includes access to two streams for reading and writing data.

```java
public Reader reader()
public PrintWriter writer()
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Accessing these classes is analogous to calling **System.in** and **System.out** directly,
although they use character streams rather than byte streams. In this manner, they are more
appropriate for handling text data.
### &emsp;&emsp; 2. Formatting Console Data
In Chapter 4, you learned about the `format()` method on **String**; and in Chapter 11, “Exceptions 
and Localization,” you worked with formatting using locales. Conveniently, each print
stream class includes a `format()` method, which includes an overloaded version that takes a
Locale to combine both of these:

```java
// PrintStream
public PrintStream format(String format, Object... args)
public PrintStream format(Locale loc, String format, Object... args)
    
// PrintWriter
public PrintWriter format(String format, Object... args)
public PrintWriter format(Locale loc, String format, Object... args)
```

> #### Note
> For convenience (as well as to make C developers feel more at home),
Java includes `printf()` methods, which function identically to the
`format()` methods. The only thing you need to know about these
methods is that they are interchangeable with `format()`.

&emsp;&emsp;
Let’s take a look at using multiple methods to print information for the user:

```java
Console console = System.console();
if (console == null) {
    throw new RuntimeException("Console not available");
} else {
    console.writer().println("Welcome to Our Zoo!");
    console.format("It has %d animals and employs %d people", 391, 25);
    console.writer().println();
    console.printf("The zoo spans %5.1f acres", 128.91);
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Assuming the Console is available at runtime, it prints the following:

```
Welcome to Our Zoo!
It has 391 animals and employs 25 people
The zoo spans 128.9 acres.
```

> #### Using _Console_ with a _Locale_
> Unlike the print stream classes, **Console** does not include an overloaded `format()`
method that takes a **Locale** instance. Instead, **Console** relies on the system locale. Of
course, you could always use a specific Locale by retrieving the **Writer** object and
passing your own **Locale** instance, such as in the following example:
> ```java
> Console console = System.console();
> console.writer().format(new Locale("fr", "CA"), "Hello World");
> ```

### &emsp;&emsp; 3. Reading Console Data
The **Console** class includes four methods for retrieving regular text data from the user.

```java
public String readLine()
public String readLine(String fmt, Object... args)
    
public char[] readPassword()
public char[] readPassword(String fmt, Object... args)
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Like using **System.in** with a **BufferedReader**, the **Console** `readLine()` method
reads input until the user presses the Enter key. The overloaded version of `readLine()` 
displays a formatted message prompt prior to requesting input. <br />

&emsp;&emsp;
The `readPassword()` methods are similar to the `readLine()` method, with two important
differences:
- The text the user types is not echoed back and displayed on the screen as they
are typing.
- The data is returned as a `char[]` instead of a **String**.

&emsp;&emsp;
The first feature improves security by not showing the password on the screen if someone
happens to be sitting next to you. The second feature involves preventing passwords from
entering the String pool.

## V. Reviewing Console Methods
The last code sample we present asks the user a series of questions and prints results based
on this information using many of various methods we learned in this section:

```java
Console console = System.console();
if (console == null) {
    throw new RuntimeException("Console not available");
} else {
    String name = console.readLine("Please enter your name: ");
    console.writer().format("Hi %s", name);
    console.writer().println();
    
    console.format("What is your address? ");
    String address = console.readLine();
    
    char[] password = console.readPassword("Enter a password "
        + "between %d and %d characters: ", 5, 10);
    char[] verify = console.readPassword("Enter the password again: ");
    console.printf("Passwords "
        + (Arrays.equals(password, verify) ? "match" : "do not match"));
}
```

&emsp;&emsp;
Assuming the Console is available, the output should resemble the following:

```
Please enter your name: Max
Hi Max
What is your address? Spoonerville
Enter a password between 5 and 10 characters:
Enter the password again:
Passwords match
```
